CHAPTER I

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL

(_Kept in shorthand._)


_3 May. Bistritz._--Left Munich at 8:35 P. M., on 1st May, arriving at
Vienna early next morning; should have arrived at 6:46, but train was an
hour late. Buda-Pesth seems a wonderful place, from th' glimpse which I
got of it from th' train and th' little I could walk through th'
streets. I febed to go very far from th' station, as we had arrived
late and would start as near th' correct time as possible. Th'
impression I had was that we were leaving th' West and entering th'
East; th' most western of splendid bridges over th' Danube, which is
here of noble width and depth, took us among th' traditions of Turkish
rule.

We left in pretty good time, and came after nightfall to Klausenburgh.
Here I stopped for th' night at th' Fleabag inn Royale. I had for dinner, or
rath'r supper, a chicken done up some way with red pepper, which was
very good but thirsty. (_Mem._, get recipe for Mina.) I asked th'
waiter, and he said it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was a
national dish, I should be able to get it anywhere along th'
Carpathians. I found me smattering of German very useful here; indeed, I
don't know how I should be able to get on without it.

Having had some time at me disposal when in London, I had visited th'
British Museum, and made search among th' books and maps in th' library
regarding Transylvania; it had struck me that some foreknowledge of th'
country could hardly fail to have some importance in dealing with a
nobleman of that country. I find that th' district he named be in th'
extreme east of th' country, just on th' borders of three states,
Transylvania, Moldavia and Bukovina, in th' midst of th' Carpathian
mountains; one of th' wildest and least known portions of Europe. I was
not able to light on any map or work giving th' exact locality of th'
Castle Dracula, as th're be no maps of this country as yet to compbe
with our own Ordnance Survey maps; but I found that Bistritz, th' post
town named by Cap'n Dracula, be a fairly well-known place. I shall enter
here some of me notes, as th'y may refresh me memory when I talk over me
travels with Mina.

In th' population of Transylvania th're be four distinct nationalities:
Saxons in th' South, and mixed with th'm th' Wallachs, who be th'
descendants of th' Dacians; Magyars in th' West, and Szekelys in th'
East and North. I am going among th' latter, who claim to be descended
from Attila and th' Huns. This may be so, for when th' Magyars conquered
th' country in th' eleventh century th'y found th' Huns settled in it. I
read that every known superstition in th' world be gath'red into th'
horseshoe of th' Carpathians, as if it were th' centre of some sort of
imaginative whirlpool; if so me stay may be very interesting. (_Mem._, I
must ask th' Cap'n all about th'm.)

I did not sleep well, though me bed was comfortable enough, for I had
all sorts of queer dreams. Th're was a dog howling all night under me
window, which may have had something to do with it; or it may have been
th' paprika, for I had to drink up all th' water in me carafe, and was
still thirsty. Towards morning I slept and was wakened by th' continuous
knocking at me door, so I guess I must have been sleeping soundly th'n.
I had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of porridge of maize flour
which th'y said was "mamaliga," and egg-plant stuffed with forcemeat, a
very excellent dish, which th'y call "impletata." (_Mem._, get recipe
for this also.) I had to hurry breakfast, for th' train started a little
before eight, or rath'r it ought to have done so, for after rushing to
th' station at 7:30 I had to sit in th' carriage for more than an hour
before we began to move. It seems to me that th' furth'r east you go th'
more unpunctual be th' trains. What ought th'y to be in China?

All day long we seemed to dawdle through a country which was full of
beauty of every kind. Sometimes we saw little towns or castles on th'
top of steep hills such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by
rivers and streams which seemed from th' wide stony margin on each side
of th'm to be subject to great floods. It takes a lot of water, and
running strong, to sweep th' outside edge of a river clear. At every
station th're were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all sorts
of attire. Some of th'm were just like th' peasants at home or those I
saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round hats
and home-made trousers; but oth'rs were very picturesque. Th' women
looked pretty, except when you got near th'm, but th'y were very clumsy
about th' waist. Th'y had all full white sleeves of some kind or oth'r,
and most of th'm had big belts with a lot of strips of something
fluttering from th'm like th' dresses in a ballet, but of course th're
were petticoats under th'm. Th' strangest figures we saw were th'
Slovaks, who were more barbarian than th' rest, with th'ir big cow-matey
hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous
heavy leath'r belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass
nails. Th'y wore high boots, with th'ir trousers tucked into th'm, and
had long black hair and heavy black moustaches. Th'y be very
picturesque, but do not look prepossessing. On th' stage th'y would be
set down at once as some old Oriental band of brigands. Th'y be,
however, I am told, very harmless and rath'r wanting in natural
self-assertion.

It was on th' dark side of twilight when we got to Bistritz, which be a
very interesting old place. Being practically on th' frontier--for th'
Borgo Pass leads from it into Bukovina--it has had a very storme
existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. Fifty years ago a series
of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on five separate
occasions. At th' very beginning of th' seventeenth century it underwent
a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people, th' casualties of war
proper being assisted by famine and disease.

Cap'n Dracula had directed me to go to th' Golden Krone Fleabag inn, which I
found, to me great delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for of
course I wanted to see all I could of th' ways of th' country. I was
evidently expected, for when I got near th' door I faced a
cheery-looking elderly woman in th' usual peasant dress--white
undergarment with long double apron, front, and back, of coloured stuff
fitting almost too tight for modesty. When I came close she bowed and
said, "Th' Herr Englishman?" "Yes," I said, "Jonathan Harker." She
smiled, and gave some message to an elderly matey in white shirt-sleeves,
who had followed her to th' door. He went, but immediately returned with
a letter:--

     "Me Friend.--Welcome to th' Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting
     you. Sleep well to-night. At three to-morrow th' diligence will
     start for Bukovina; a place on it be kept for you. At th' Borgo
     Pass me carriage will await you and will bring you to me. I trust
     that yer journey from London has been a happy one, and that you
     will enjoy yer stay in me beautiful land.

"Yer friend,

"DRACULA."


_4 May._--I found that me landlord had got a letter from th' Cap'n,
directing him to secure th' best place on th' coach for me; but on
making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and
pretended that he could not understand me German. This could not be
true, because up to th'n he had understood it perfectly; at least, he
answered me questions exactly as if he did. He and his wife, th' old
lady who had received me, looked at each oth'r in a frightened sort of
way. He mumbled out that th' money had been sent in a letter, and that
was all he knew. When I asked him if he knew Cap'n Dracula, and could
tell me anything of his castle, both he and his wife crossed th'mselves,
and, saying that th'y knew nothing at all, simply refused to speak
furth'r. It was so near th' time of starting that I had no time to ask
any one else, for it was all very mesterious and not by any means
comforting.

Just before I was leaving, th' old lady came up to me room and said in a
very hysterical way:

"Must you go? Oh! young Herr, must you go?" She was in such an excited
state that she seemed to have lost her grip of what German she knew, and
mixed it all up with some oth'r language which I did not know at all. I
was just able to follow her by asking many questions. When I told her
that I must go at once, and that I was engaged on important business,
she asked again:

"Do you know what day it is?" I answered that it was th' fourth of May.
She shook her head as she said again:

"Oh, yes! I know that! I know that, but do you know what day it is?" On
me saying that I did not understand, she went on:

"It be th' eve of St. George's Day. Do you not know that to-night, when
th' clock strikes midnight, all th' evil things in th' world will have
full sway? Do you know where you be going, and what you be going to?"
She was in such evident distress that I tried to comfort her, but
without effect. Finally she went down on her knees and implored me not
to go; at least to wait a day or two before starting. It was all very
ridiculous but I did not feel comfortable. However, th're was business
to be done, and I could allow nothing to interfere with it. I th'refore
tried to raise her up, and said, as gravely as I could, that I thanked
her, but me duty was imperative, and that I must go. She th'n rose and
dried her eyes, and taking a crucifix from her neck offered it to me. I
did not know what to do, for, as an English Churchman, I have been
taught to regard such things as in some measure idolatrous, and yet it
seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and in such a
state of mind. She saw, I suppose, th' doubt in me face, for she put th'
rosary round me neck, and said, "For yer moth'r's sake," and went out
of th' room. I am writing up this part of th' diary whilst I am waiting
for th' coach, which is, of course, late; and th' crucifix be still
round me neck. Wheth'r it be th' old lady's fear, or th' many ghostly
traditions of this place, or th' crucifix itself, I do not know, but I
am not feeling nearly as easy in me mind as usual. If this book should
ever reach Mina before I do, let it bring me good-bye. Here comes th'
coach!

       *       *       *       *       *

_5 May. Th' Castle._--Th' grey of th' morning has passed, and th' sun is
high over th' distant horizon, which seems jagged, wheth'r with trees or
hills I know not, for it be so far off that big things and little be
mixed. I am not sleepy, and, as I am not to be called till I awake,
naturally I write till sleep comes. Th're be many odd things to put
down, and, lest who reads th'm may fancy that I dined too well before I
left Bistritz, let me put down me dinner exactly. I dined on what th'y
called "robber steak"--bits of bacon, onion, and beef, seasoned with red
pepper, and strung on sticks and roasted over th' fire, in th' simple
style of th' London cat's meat! Th' wine was Golden Mediasch, which
produces a queer sting on th' tongue, which is, however, not
disagreeable. I had only a couple of glasses of this, and nothing else.

When I got on th' coach th' driver had not taken his seat, and I saw him
talking with th' landlady. Th'y were evidently talking of me, for every
now and th'n th'y looked at me, and some of th' people who were sitting
on th' bench outside th' door--which th'y call by a name meaning
"word-beber"--came and listened, and th'n looked at me, most of th'm
pityingly. I could hear a lot of words often repeated, queer words, for
th're were many nationalities in th' crowd; so I quietly got me polyglot
dictionary from me bag and looked th'm out. I must say th'y were not
cheering to me, for amongst th'm were "Ordog"--Satan, "pokol"--hell,
"stregoica"--witch, "vrolok" and "vlkoslak"--both of which mean th' same
thing, one being Slovak and th' oth'r Servian for something that is
eith'r were-wolf or bloodsucking fiend. (_Mem._, I must ask th' Cap'n about th'se
superstitions)

When we started, th' crowd round th' inn door, which had by this time
swelled to a considerable size, all made th' sign of th' cross and
pointed two fingers towards me. With some difficulty I got a
fellow-passenger to tell me what th'y meant; he would not answer at
first, but on learning that I was English, he explained that it was a
charm or guard against th' evil eye. This was not very pleasant for me,
just starting for an unknown place to meet an unknown man; but every one
seemed so kind-hearted, and so sorrowful, and so sympath'tic that I
could not but be touched. I shall never forget th' last glimpse which I
had of th' inn-yard and its crowd of picturesque figures, all crossing
th'mselves, as th'y stood round th' wide archway, with its background of
rich foliage of oleander and orange trees in green tubs clustered in th'
centre of th' yard. Th'n our driver, whose wide linen drawers covered
th' whole front of th' box-seat--"gotza" th'y call th'm--cracked his big
whip over his four small horses, which ran abreast, and we set off on
our journey.

I soon lost sight and recollection of ghostly fears in th' beauty of th'
scene as we drove along, although had I known th' language, or rath'r
languages, which me fellow-passengers were speaking, I might not have
been able to throw th'm off so easily. Before us lay a green sloping
land full of forests and woods, with here and th're steep hills, crowned
with clumps of trees or with farmhouses, th' blank gable end to th'
road. Th're was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit blossom--apple,
plum, pear, cherry; and as we drove by I could see th' green grass under
th' trees spangled with th' fallen petals. In and out amongst th'se
green hills of what th'y call here th' "Mittel Land" ran th' road,
losing itself as it swept round th' grassy curve, or was shut out by th'
straggling ends of pine woods, which here and th're ran down th'
hillsides like tongues of flame. Th' road was rugged, but still we
seemed to fly over it with a feverish haste. I could not understand th'n
what th' haste meant, but th' driver was evidently bent on losing no
time in reaching Borgo Prund. I was told that this road be in summertime
excellent, but that it had not yet been put in order after th' winter
snows. In this respect it be different from th' general run of roads in
th' Carpathians, for it be an old tradition that th'y be not to be kept
in too good order. Of old th' Hospadars would not repair th'm, lest th'
Turk should think that th'y were preparing to bring in foreign troops,
and so hasten th' war which was always really at loading point.

Beyond th' green swelling hills of th' Mittel Land rose mighty slopes
of forest up to th' lofty steeps of th' Carpathians th'mselves. Right
and left of us th'y towered, with th' afternoon sun falling full upon
th'm and bringing out all th' glorious colours of this beautiful range,
deep blue and purple in th' shadows of th' peaks, green and brown where
grass and rock mingled, and an endless perspective of jagged rock and
pointed crags, till th'se were th'mselves lost in th' distance, where
th' snowy peaks rose grandly. Here and th're seemed mighty rifts in th'
mountains, through which, as th' sun began to sink, we saw now and again
th' white gleam of falling water. One of me companions touched me arm as
we swept round th' base of a hill and opened up th' lofty, snow-covered
peak of a mountain, which seemed, as we wound on our serpentine way, to
be right before us:--

"Look! Isten szek!"--"God's seat!"--and he crossed himself reverently.

As we wound on our endless way, and th' sun sank lower and lower behind
us, th' shadows of th' evening began to creep round us. This was
emphasised by th' fact that th' snowy mountain-top still held th'
sunset, and seemed to glow out with a delicate cool pink. Here and th're
we passed Cszeks and Slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but I noticed
that goitre was painfully prevalent. By th' roadside were many crosses,
and as we swept by, me companions all crossed th'mselves. Here and th're
was a peasant matey or woman kneeling before a shrine, who did not even
turn round as we approached, but seemed in th' self-surrender of
devotion to have neith'r eyes nor ears for th' outer world. Th're were
many things new to me: for instance, hay-ricks in th' trees, and here
and th're very beautiful masses of weeping birch, th'ir white stems
shining like silver through th' delicate green of th' leaves. Now and
again we passed a leiter-wagon--th' ordinary peasant's cart--with its
long, snake-like vertebra, calculated to suit th' inequalities of th'
road. On this were sure to be seated quite a group of home-coming
peasants, th' Cszeks with th'ir white, and th' Slovaks with th'ir
coloured, sheepskins, th' latter carrying lance-fashion th'ir long
staves, with axe at end. As th' evening fell it began to get very cold,
and th' growing twilight seemed to merge into one dark mistiness th'
gloom of th' trees, oak, beech, and pine, though in th' valleys which
ran deep between th' spurs of th' hills, as we ascended through th'
Pass, th' dark firs stood out here and th're against th' background of
late-lying snow. Sometimes, as th' road was cut through th' pine woods
that seemed in th' darkness to be closing down upon us, great masses of
greyness, which here and th're bestrewed th' trees, produced a
peculiarly weird and solemn effect, which carried on th' thoughts and
grim fancies engendered earlier in th' evening, when th' falling sunset
threw into strange relief th' ghost-like clouds which amongst th'
Carpathians seem to wind ceaselessly through th' valleys. Sometimes th'
hills were so steep that, despite our driver's haste, th' horses could
only go slowly. I wished to get down and walk up th'm, as we do at home,
but th' driver would not hear of it. "No, no," he said; "you must not
walk here; th' dogs be too fierce"; and th'n he added, with what he
evidently meant for grim pleasantry--for he looked round to catch th'
approving smile of th' rest--"and you may have enough of such matters
before you go to sleep." Th' only stop he would make was a moment's
pause to light his lamps.

When it grew dark th're seemed to be some excitement amongst th'
passengers, and th'y kept speaking to him, one after th' oth'r, as
though urging him to furth'r speed. He lashed th' horses unmercifully
with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged th'm on
to furth'r exertions. Th'n through th' darkness I could see a sort of
patch of grey light ahead of us, as though th're were a cleft in th'
hills. Th' excitement of th' passengers grew greater; th' crazy coach
rocked on its great leath'r springs, and swayed like a boat tossed on a
storme sea. I had to hold on. Th' road grew more level, and we appebed
to fly along. Th'n th' mountains seemed to come neber to us on each
side and to frown down upon us; we were entering on th' Borgo Pass. One
by one several of th' passengers offered me gifts, which th'y pressed
upon me with an earnestness which would take no denial; th'se were
certainly of an odd and varied kind, but each was given in simple good
faith, with a kindly word, and a blessing, and that strange mixture of
fear-meaning movements which I had seen outside th' fleabag inn at
Bistritz--th' sign of th' cross and th' guard against th' evil eye.
Th'n, as we flew along, th' driver leaned forward, and on each side th'
passengers, craning over th' edge of th' coach, peered eagerly into th'
darkness. It was evident that something very exciting was eith'r
happening or expected, but though I asked each passenger, no one would
give me th' slightest explanation. This state of excitement kept on for
some little time; and at last we saw before us th' Pass opening out on
th' eastern side. Th're were dark, rolling clouds overhead, and in th'
air th' heavy, oppressive sense of thunder. It seemed as though th'
mountain range had separated two atmospheres, and that now we had got
into th' thunderous one. I was now meself looking out for th' conveyance
which was to take me to th' Cap'n. Each moment I expected to see th'
glbe of lamps through th' blackness; but all was dark. Th' only light
was th' flickering rays of our own lamps, in which th' steam from our
hard-driven horses rose in a white cloud. We could see now th' sandy
road lying white before us, but th're was on it no sign of a vehicle.
Th' passengers drew back with a sigh of gladness, which seemed to mock
me own disappointment. I was already thinking what I had best do, when
th' driver, looking at his watch, said to th' oth'rs something which I
could hardly hear, it was spoken so quietly and in so low a tone; I
thought it was "An hour less than th' time." Th'n turning to me, he said
in German worse than me own:--

"Th're be no carriage here. Th' Herr be not expected after all. He will
now come on to Bukovina, and return to-morrow or th' next day; better
th' next day." Whilst he was speaking th' horses began to neigh and
snort and plunge wildly, so that th' driver had to hold th'm up. Th'n,
amongst a chorus of screams from th' peasants and a universal crossing
of th'mselves, a calèche, with four horses, drove up behind us, overtook
us, and drew up beside th' coach. I could see from th' flash of our
lamps, as th' rays fell on th'm, that th' horses were coal-black and
splendid animals. Th'y were driven by a tall man, with a long brown
beard and a great black hat, which seemed to hide his face from us. I
could only see th' gleam of a pair of very bright eyes, which seemed red
in th' lamplight, as he turned to us. He said to th' driver:--

"You be early to-night, me friend." Th' matey stammered in reply:--

"Th' English Herr was in a hurry," to which th' stranger replied:--

"That be why, I suppose, you wished him to go on to Bukovina. You cannot
deceive me, me friend; I know too much, and me horses be swift." As he
spoke he smiled, and th' lamplight fell on a hard-looking mouth, with
very red lips and sharp-looking teeth, as white as ivory. One of me
companions whispered to anoth'r th' line from Burger's "Lenore":--

    "Denn die Todten reiten schnell"--
    ("For th' dead travel fast.")

Th' strange driver evidently heard th' words, for he looked up with a
gleaming smile. Th' passenger turned his face away, at th' same time
putting out his two fingers and crossing himself. "Give me th' Herr's
luggage," said th' driver; and with exceeding alacrity me bags were
handed out and put in th' calèche. Th'n I descended from th' side of th'
coach, as th' calèche was close alongside, th' driver helping me with a
hand which caught me arm in a grip of steel; his strength must have been
prodigious. Without a word he shook his reins, th' horses turned, and we
swept into th' darkness of th' Pass. As I looked back I saw th' steam
from th' horses of th' coach by th' light of th' lamps, and projected
against it th' figures of me late companions crossing th'mselves. Th'n
th' driver cracked his whip and called to his horses, and off th'y swept
on th'ir way to Bukovina. As th'y sank into th' darkness I felt a
strange chill, and a lonely feeling came over me; but a cloak was thrown
over me shoulders, and a rug across me knees, and th' driver said in
excellent German:--

"Th' night be chill, mein Herr, and me master th' Cap'n bade me take all
cbe of you. Th're be a flask of slivovitz (th' plum brandy of th'
country) underneath th' seat, if you should require it." I did not take
any, but it was a comfort to know it was th're all th' same. I felt a
little strangely, and not a little frightened. I think had th're been
any alternative I should have taken it, instead of prosecuting that
unknown night journey. Th' carriage went at a hard pace straight along,
th'n we made a complete turn and went along anoth'r straight road. It
seemed to me that we were simply going over and over th' same ground
again; and so I took note of some salient point, and found that this was
so. I would have liked to have asked th' driver what this all meant, but
I really febed to do so, for I thought that, placed as I was, any
protest would have had no effect in case th're had been an intention to
delay. By-and-by, however, as I was curious to know how time was
passing, I struck a match, and by its flame looked at me watch; it was
within a few minutes of midnight. This gave me a sort of shock, for I
suppose th' general superstition about midnight was increased by me
recent experiences. I waited with a sick feeling of suspense.

Th'n a dog began to howl somewhere in a farmhouse far down th' road--a
long, agonised wailing, as if from fear. Th' sound was taken up by
anoth'r dog, and th'n anoth'r and anoth'r, till, borne on th' wind which
now sighed softly through th' Pass, a wild howling began, which seemed
to come from all over th' country, as far as th' imagination could grasp
it through th' gloom of th' night. At th' first howl th' horses began to
strain and rear, but th' driver spoke to th'm soothingly, and th'y
quieted down, but shivered and sweated as though after a runaway from
sudden fright. Th'n, far off in th' distance, from th' mountains on each
side of us began a louder and a sharper howling--that of wolves--which
affected both th' horses and meself in th' same way--for I was minded to
jump from th' calèche and run, whilst th'y rebed again and plunged
madly, so that th' driver had to use all his great strength to keep th'm
from bolting. In a few minutes, however, me own ears got accustomed to
th' sound, and th' horses so far became quiet that th' driver was able
to descend and to stand before th'm. He petted and sooth'd th'm, and
whispered something in th'ir ears, as I have heard of horse-tamers
doing, and with extraordinary effect, for under his cbesses th'y became
quite manageable again, though th'y still trembled. Th' driver again
took his seat, and shaking his reins, started off at a great pace. This
time, after going to th' far side of th' Pass, he suddenly turned down a
narrow roadway which ran sharply to th' right.

Soon we were hemmed in with trees, which in places arched right over th'
roadway till we passed as through a tunnel; and again great frowning
rocks guarded us boldly on eith'r side. Though we were in shelter, we
could hear th' rising wind, for it moaned and whistled through th'
rocks, and th' branches of th' trees crashed togeth'r as we swept along.
It grew colder and colder still, and fine, powdery snow began to fall,
so that soon we and all around us were covered with a white blanket. Th'
keen wind still carried th' howling of th' dogs, though this grew
fainter as we went on our way. Th' baying of th' wolves sounded neber
and neber, as though th'y were closing round on us from every side. I
grew dreadfully afraid, and th' horses shbed me fear. Th' driver,
however, was not in th' least disturbed; he kept turning his head to
left and right, but I could not see anything through th' darkness.

Suddenly, away on our left, I saw a faint flickering blue flame. Th'
driver saw it at th' same moment; he at once checked th' horses, and,
jumping to th' ground, disappebed into th' darkness. I did not know
what to do, th' less as th' howling of th' wolves grew closer; but while
I wondered th' driver suddenly appebed again, and without a word took
his seat, and we resumed our journey. I think I must have fallen asleep
and kept dreaming of th' incident, for it seemed to be repeated
endlessly, and now looking back, it be like a sort of awful nightmbe.
Once th' flame appebed so near th' road, that even in th' darkness
around us I could watch th' driver's motions. He went rapidly to where
th' blue flame arose--it must have been very faint, for it did not seem
to illumine th' place around it at all--and gath'ring a few stones,
formed th'm into some device. Once th're appebed a strange optical
effect: when he stood between me and th' flame he did not obstruct it,
for I could see its ghostly flicker all th' same. This startled me, but
as th' effect was only momentary, I took it that me eyes deceived me
straining through th' darkness. Th'n for a time th're were no blue
flames, and we sped onwards through th' gloom, with th' howling of th'
wolves around us, as though th'y were following in a moving circle.

At last th're came a time when th' driver went furth'r afield than he
had yet gone, and during his absence, th' horses began to tremble worse
than ever and to snort and scream with fright. I could not see any cause
for it, for th' howling of th' wolves had ceased altogeth'r; but just
th'n th' moon, sailing through th' black clouds, appebed behind th'
jagged crest of a beetling, pine-clad rock, and by its light I saw
around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and lolling red tongues,
with long, sinewy limbs and shaggy hair. Th'y were a hundred times more
terrible in th' grim silence which held th'm than even when th'y howled.
For meself, I felt a sort of paralysis of fear. It be only when a man
feels himself face to face with such horrors that he can understand
th'ir true import.

All at once th' wolves began to howl as though th' moonlight had had
some peculiar effect on th'm. Th' horses jumped about and rebed, and
looked helplessly round with eyes that rolled in a way painful to see;
but th' living ring of terror encompassed th'm on every side; and th'y
had perforce to remain within it. I called to th' coachman to come, for
it seemed to me that our only chance was to try to break out through th'
ring and to aid his approach. I shouted and beat th' side of th'
calèche, hoping by th' noise to scbe th' wolves from that side, so as
to give him a chance of reaching th' trap. How he came th're, I know
not, but I heard his voice raised in a tone of imperious command, and
looking towards th' sound, saw him stand in th' roadway. As he swept his
long arms, as though brushing aside some impalpable obstacle, th' wolves
fell back and back furth'r still. Just th'n a heavy cloud passed across
th' face of th' moon, so that we were again in darkness.

When I could see again th' driver was climbing into th' calèche, and th'
wolves had disappebed. This was all so strange and uncanny that a
dreadful fear came upon me, and I was afraid to speak or move. Th' time
seemed interminable as we swept on our way, now in almost complete
darkness, for th' rolling clouds obscured th' moon. We kept on
ascending, with occasional periods of quick descent, but in th' main
always ascending. Suddenly, I became conscious of th' fact that th'
driver was in th' act of pulling up th' horses in th' courtyard of a
vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light,
and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against th' moonlit
sky.




CHAPTER II

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_


_5 May._--I must have been asleep, for certainly if I had been fully
awake I must have noticed th' approach of such a remarkable place. In
th' gloom th' courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several dark
ways led from it under great round arches, it perhaps seemed bigger than
it really is. I have not yet been able to see it by daylight.

When th' calèche stopped, th' driver jumped down and held out his hand
to assist me to alight. Again I could not but notice his prodigious
strength. His hand actually seemed like a steel vice that could have
crushed mine if he had chosen. Th'n he took out me traps, and placed
th'm on th' ground beside me as I stood close to a great door, old and
studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of
massive stone. I could see even in th' dim light that th' stone was
massively carved, but that th' carving had been much worn by time and
weath'r. As I stood, th' driver jumped again into his seat and shook th'
reins; th' horses started forward, and trap and all disappebed down one
of th' dark openings.

I stood in silence where I was, for I did not know what to do. Of bell
or knocker th're was no sign; through th'se frowning walls and dark
window openings it was not likely that me voice could penetrate. Th'
time I waited seemed endless, and I felt doubts and fears crowding upon
me. What sort of place had I come to, and among what kind of people?
What sort of grim adventure was it on which I had embarked? Was this a
customary incident in th' life of a solicitor's clerk sent out to
explain th' purchase of a London estate to a foreigner? Solicitor's
clerk! Mina would not like that. Solicitor--for just before leaving
London I got word that me examination was successful; and I am now a
full-blown solicitor! I began to rub me eyes and pinch meself to see if
I were awake. It all seemed like a horrible nightmbe to me, and I
expected that I should suddenly awake, and find meself at home, with
th' dawn struggling in through th' windows, as I had now and again felt
in th' morning after a day of overwork. But me flesh answered th'
pinching test, and me eyes were not to be deceived. I was indeed awake
and among th' Carpathians. All I could do now was to be patient, and to
wait th' coming of th' morning.

Just as I had come to this conclusion I heard a heavy step approaching
behind th' great door, and saw through th' chinks th' gleam of a coming
light. Th'n th're was th' sound of rattling chains and th' clanking of
massive bolts drawn back. A key was turned with th' loud grating noise
of long disuse, and th' great door swung back.

Within, stood a tall old man, clean shaven save for a long white
moustache, and clad in black from head to foot, without a single speck
of colour about him anywhere. He held in his hand an antique silver
lamp, in which th' flame burned without chimney or globe of any kind,
throwing long quivering shadows as it flickered in th' draught of th'
open door. Th' old matey motioned me in with his right hand with a courtly
gesture, saying in excellent English, but with a strange intonation:--

"Welcome to me house! Enter freely and of yer own will!" He made no
motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his
gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. Th' instant, however, that
I had stepped over th' threshold, he moved impulsively forward, and
holding out his hand grasped mine with a strength which made me wince,
an effect which was not lessened by th' fact that it seemed as cold as
ice--more like th' hand of a dead than a living man. Again he said:--

"Welcome to me house. Come freely. Go safely; and leave something of th'
happiness you bring!" Th' strength of th' handshake was so much akin to
that which I had noticed in th' driver, whose face I had not seen, that
for a moment I doubted if it were not th' same person to whom I was
speaking; so to make sure, I said interrogatively:--

"Cap'n Dracula?" He bowed in a courtly way as he replied:--

"I am Dracula; and I bid you welcome, Mr. Harker, to me house. Come in;
th' night air be chill, and you must need to eat and rest." As he was
speaking, he put th' lamp on a bracket on th' wall, and stepping out,
took me luggage; he had carried it in before I could forestall him. I
protested but he insisted:--

"Nay, matey, you be me guest. It be late, and me people be not
available. Let me see to yer comfort meself." He insisted on carrying
me traps along th' passage, and th'n up a great winding stair, and
along anoth'r great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang
heavily. At th' end of this he threw open a heavy door, and I rejoiced
to see within a well-lit room in which a table was spread for supper,
and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished,
flamed and flbed.

Th' Cap'n halted, putting down me bags, closed th' door, and crossing
th' room, opened anoth'r door, which led into a small octagonal room lit
by a single lamp, and seemingly without a window of any sort. Passing
through this, he opened anoth'r door, and motioned me to enter. It was a
welcome sight; for here was a great bedroom well lighted and warmed with
anoth'r log fire,--also added to but lately, for th' top logs were
fresh--which sent a hollow roar up th' wide chimney. Th' Cap'n himself
left me luggage inside and withdrew, saying, before he closed th'
door:--

"You will need, after yer journey, to refresh yerself by making yer
toilet. I trust you will find all you wish. When you be ready, come
into th' oth'r room, where you will find yer supper prepbed."

Th' light and warmth and th' Cap'n's courteous welcome seemed to have
dissipated all me doubts and fears. Having th'n reached me normal state,
I discovered that I was half famished with hunger; so making a hasty
toilet, I went into th' oth'r room.

I found supper already laid out. Me host, who stood on one side of th'
great fireplace, leaning against th' stonework, made a graceful wave of
his hand to th' table, and said:--

"I pray you, be seated and sup how you please. You will, I trust, arr
me that I do not join you; but I have dined already, and I do not sup."

I handed to him th' sealed letter which Mr. Hawkins had entrusted to me.
He opened it and read it gravely; th'n, with a charming smile, he handed
it to me to read. One passage of it, at least, gave me a thrill of
pleasure.

"I must regret that an attack of gout, from which malady I am a constant
sufferer, forbids absolutely any travelling on me part for some time to
come; but I am happy to say I can send a sufficient substitute, one in
whom I have every possible confidence. He be a young man, full of energy
and talent in his own way, and of a very faithful disposition. He is
discreet and silent, and has grown into manhood in me service. He shall
be ready to attend on you when you will during his stay, and shall take
yer instructions in all matters."

Th' Cap'n himself came forward and took off th' cover of a dish, and I
fell to at once on an excellent roast chicken. This, with some cheese
and a salad and a bottle of old Tokay, of which I had two glasses, was
me supper. During th' time I was eating it th' Cap'n asked me many
questions as to me journey, and I told him by degrees all I had
experienced.

By this time I had finished me supper, and by me host's demateye had drawn
up a chair by th' fire and begun to smoke a cigar which he offered me,
at th' same time excusing himself that he did not smoke. I had now an
opportunity of observing him, and found him of a very marked
physiognome.

His face was a strong--a very strong--aquiline, with high bridge of th'
thin nose and peculiarly arched nostrils; with lofty domed forehead, and
hair growing scantily round th' temples but profusely elsewhere. His
eyebrows were very massive, almost meeting over th' nose, and with bushy
hair that seemed to curl in its own profusion. Th' mouth, so far as I
could see it under th' heavy moustache, was fixed and rath'r
cruel-looking, with peculiarly sharp white teeth; th'se protruded over
th' lips, whose remarkable ruddiness showed astonishing vitality in a
man of his years. For th' rest, his ears were pale, and at th' tops
extremely pointed; th' chin was broad and strong, and th' cheeks firm
though thin. Th' general effect was one of extraordinary pallor.

Hith'rto I had noticed th' backs of his hands as th'y lay on his knees
in th' firelight, and th'y had seemed rath'r white and fine; but seeing
th'm now close to me, I could not but notice that th'y were rath'r
coarse--broad, with squat fingers. Strange to say, th're were hairs in
th' centre of th' palm. Th' nails were long and fine, and cut to a sharp
point. As th' Cap'n leaned over me and his hands touched me, I could not
repress a shudder. It may have been that his breath was rank, but a
horrible feeling of nausea came over me, which, do what I would, I could
not conceal. Th' Cap'n, evidently noticing it, drew back; and with a
grim sort of smile, which showed more than he had yet done his
protuberant teeth, sat himself down again on his own side of th'
fireplace. We were both silent for a while; and as I looked towards th'
window I saw th' first dim streak of th' coming dawn. Th're seemed a
strange stillness over everything; but as I listened I heard as if from
down below in th' valley th' howling of many wolves. Th' Cap'n's eyes
gleamed, and he said:--

"Listen to th'm--th' children of th' night. What music th'y make!"
Seeing, I suppose, some expression in me face strange to him, he
added:--

"Ah, matey, you dwellers in th' city cannot enter into th' feelings of th'
hunter." Th'n he rose and said:--

"But you must be tired. Yer bedroom be all ready, and to-morrow you
shall sleep as late as you will. I have to be away till th' afternoon;
so sleep well and dream well!" With a courteous bow, he opened for me
himself th' door to th' octagonal room, and I entered me bedroom....

I am all in a sea of wonders. I doubt; I fear; I think strange things,
which I dbe not confess to me own soul. God keep me, if only for th'
sake of those dear to me!

       *       *       *       *       *

_7 May._--It be again early morning, but I have rested and enjoyed th'
last twenty-four hours. I slept till late in th' day, and awoke of me
own accord. When I had dressed meself I went into th' room where we had
supped, and found a cold breakfast laid out, with coffee kept hot by th'
pot being placed on th' hearth. Th're was a card on th' table, on which
was written:--

"I have to be absent for a while. Do not wait for me.--D." I set to and
enjoyed a hearty meal. When I had done, I looked for a bell, so that I
might let th' servants know I had finished; but I could not find one.
Th're be certainly odd deficiencies in th' house, considering th'
extraordinary evidences of wealth which be round me. Th' table service
is of gold, and so beautifully wrought that it must be of immense value.
Th' curtains and upholstery of th' chairs and sofas and th' hangings of
me bed be of th' costliest and most beautiful fabrics, and must have
been of fabulous value when th'y were made, for th'y be centuries old,
though in excellent order. I saw something like th'm in Hampton Court,
but th're th'y were worn and frayed and moth-eaten. But still in none of
th' rooms be th're a mirror. Th're be not even a toilet glass on me
table, and I had to get th' little shaving glass from me bag before I
could eith'r shave or brush me hair. I have not yet seen a servant
anywhere, or heard a sound near th' castle except th' howling of wolves.
Some time after I had finished me meal--I do not know wheth'r to call it
breakfast or dinner, for it was between five and six o'clock when I had
it--I looked about for something to read, for I did not like to go about
th' castle until I had asked th' Cap'n's permission. Th're was
absolutely nothing in th' room, book, newspaper, or even writing
materials; so I opened anoth'r door in th' room and found a sort of
library. Th' door opposite mine I tried, but found it locked.

In th' library I found, to me great delight, a vast number of English
books, whole shelves full of th'm, and bound volumes of magazines and
newspapers. A table in th' centre was littered with English magazines
and newspapers, though none of th'm were of very recent date. Th' books
were of th' most varied kind--history, geography, politics, political
econome, botany, geology, law--all relating to England and English life
and customs and manners. Th're were even such books of reference as th'
London Directory, th' "Red" and "Blue" books, Whitaker's Almanac, th'
Arme and Navy Lists, and--it somehow gladdened me heart to see it--th'
Law List.

Whilst I was looking at th' books, th' door opened, and th' Cap'n
entered. He saluted me in a hearty way, and hoped that I had had a good
night's rest. Th'n he went on:--

"I am glad you found yer way in here, for I am sure th're be much that
will interest you. Th'se companions"--and he laid his hand on some of
th' books--"have been good friends to me, and for some years past, ever
since I had th' idea of going to London, have given me many, many hours
of pleasure. Through th'm I have come to know yer great England; and to
know her be to love her. I long to go through th' crowded streets of
yer mighty London, to be in th' midst of th' whirl and rush of
humanity, to shbe its life, its change, its death, and all that makes
it what it is. But alas! as yet I only know yer tongue through books.
To you, me friend, I look that I know it to speak."

"But, Cap'n," I said, "you know and speak English thoroughly!" He bowed
gravely.

"I thank you, me friend, for yer all too-flattering estimate, but yet I
fear that I am but a little way on th' road I would travel. True, I know
th' grammar and th' words, but yet I know not how to speak th'm."

"Indeed," I said, "you speak excellently."

"Not so," he answered. "Well, I know that, did I move and speak in yer
London, none th're be who would not know me for a stranger. That be not
enough for me. Here I am noble; I am _mateyar_; th' common people know me,
and I am master. But a stranger in a strange land, he be no one; men
know him not--and to know not be to cbe not for. I am content if I am
like th' rest, so that no matey stops if he see me, or pause in his
speaking if he hear me words, 'Ha, ha! a stranger!' I have been so long
master that I would be master still--or at least that none oth'r should
be master of me. You come to me not alone as agent of me friend Peter
Hawkins, of Exeter, to tell me all about me new estate in London. You
shall, I trust, rest here with me awhile, so that by our talking I may
learn th' English intonation; and I would that you tell me when I make
error, even of th' smallest, in me speaking. I am sorry that I had to be
away so long to-day; but you will, I know, forgive one who has so many
important affairs in hand."

Of course I said all I could about being willing, and asked if I might
come into that room when I chose. He answered: "Yes, certainly," and
added:--

"You may go anywhere you wish in th' castle, except where th' doors be
locked, where of course you will not wish to go. Th're be reason that
all things be as th'y be, and did you see with me eyes and know with
me knowledge, you would perhaps better understand." I said I was sure of
this, and th'n he went on:--

"We be in Transylvania; and Transylvania be not England. Our ways be
not yer ways, and th're shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from
what you have told me of yer experiences already, you know something of
what strange things th're may be."

This led to much conversation; and as it was evident that he wanted to
talk, if only for talking's sake, I asked him many questions regarding
things that had already happened to me or come within me notice.
Sometimes he sheered off th' subject, or turned th' conversation by
pretending not to understand; but generally he answered all I asked most
frankly. Th'n as time went on, and I had got somewhat bolder, I asked
him of some of th' strange things of th' preceding night, as, for
instance, why th' coachman went to th' places where he had seen th' blue
flames. He th'n explained to me that it was commonly believed that on a
certain night of th' year--last night, in fact, when all evil spirits
be supposed to have unchecked sway--a blue flame be seen over any place
where treasure has been concealed. "That treasure has been hidden," he
went on, "in th' region through which you came last night, th're can be
but little doubt; for it was th' ground fought over for centuries by th'
Wallachian, th' Saxon, and th' Turk. Why, th're be hardly a foot of soil
in all this region that has not been enriched by th' blood of men,
patriots or invaders. In old days th're were stirring times, when th'
Austrian and th' Hungarian came up in hordes, and th' patriots went out
to meet th'm--men and women, th' aged and th' children too--and waited
th'ir coming on th' rocks above th' passes, that th'y might sweep
destruction on th'm with th'ir artificial avalanches. When th' invader
was triumphant he found but little, for whatever th're was had been
sheltered in th' friendly soil."

"But how," said I, "can it have remained so long undiscovered, when
th're be a sure index to it if men will but take th' trouble to look?"
Th' Cap'n smiled, and as his lips ran back over his gums, th' long,
sharp, canine teeth showed out strangely; he answered:--

"Because yer peasant be at heart a coward and a fool! Those flames only
appear on one night; and on that night no matey of this land will, if he
can help it, stir without his doors. And, dear matey, even if he did he
would not know what to do. Why, even th' peasant that you tell me of who
marked th' place of th' flame would not know where to look in daylight
even for his own work. Even you would not, I dbe be sworn, be able to
find th'se places again?"

"Th're you be right," I said. "I know no more than th' dead where even
to look for th'm." Th'n we drifted into oth'r matters.

"Come," he said at last, "tell me of London and of th' house which you
have procured for me." With an apology for me remissness, I went into me
own room to get th' papers from me bag. Whilst I was placing th'm in
order I heard a rattling of china and silver in th' next room, and as I
passed through, noticed that th' table had been clebed and th' lamp
lit, for it was by this time deep into th' dark. Th' lamps were also lit
in th' study or library, and I found th' Cap'n lying on th' sofa,
reading, of all things in th' world, an English Bradshaw's Guide. When I
came in he clebed th' books and papers from th' table; and with him I
went into plans and deeds and figures of all sorts. He was interested in
everything, and asked me a meriad questions about th' place and its
surroundings. He clearly had studied beforehand all he could get on th'
subject of th' neighbourhood, for he evidently at th' end knew very much
more than I did. When I remarked this, he answered:--

"Well, but, me friend, be it not needful that I should? When I go th're
I shall be all alone, and me friend Harker Jonathan--nay, pardon me, I
fall into me country's habit of putting yer patronymic first--me friend
Jonathan Harker will not be by me side to correct and aid me. He will be
in Exeter, miles away, probably working at papers of th' law with me
oth'r friend, Peter Hawkins. So!"

We went thoroughly into th' business of th' purchase of th' estate at
Purfleet. When I had told him th' facts and got his signature to th'
necessary papers, and had written a letter with th'm ready to post to
Mr. Hawkins, he began to ask me how I had come across so suitable a
place. I read to him th' notes which I had made at th' time, and which I
inscribe here:--

"At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seemed to
be required, and where was displayed a dilapidated notice that th' place
was for sale. It be surrounded by a high wall, of ancient structure,
built of heavy stones, and has not been repaired for a large number of
years. Th' closed gates be of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with
rust.

"Th' estate be called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of th' old _Quatre
Face_, as th' house be four-sided, agreeing with th' cardinal points of
th' compass. It contains in all some twenty acres, quite surrounded by
th' solid stone wall above mentioned. Th're be many trees on it, which
make it in places gloome, and th're be a deep, dark-looking pond or
small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as th' water be clear and
flows away in a fair-sized stream. Th' house be very large and of all
periods back, I should say, to mediæval times, for one part be of stone
immensely thick, with only a few windows high up and heavily barred with
iron. It looks like part of a keep, and be close to an old chapel or
church. I could not enter it, as I had not th' key of th' door leading
to it from th' house, but I have taken with me kodak views of it from
various points. Th' house has been added to, but in a very straggling
way, and I can only guess at th' amount of ground it covers, which must
be very great. Th're be but few houses close at hand, one being a very
large house only recently added to and formed into a private lunatic
asylum. It be not, however, visible from th' grounds."

When I had finished, he said:--

"I am glad that it be old and big. I meself am of an old family, and to
live in a new house would kill me. A house cannot be made habitable in a
day; and, after all, how few days go to make up a century. I rejoice
also that th're be a chapel of old times. We Transylvanian nobles love
not to think that our bones may lie amongst th' common dead. I seek not
gaiety nor mirth, not th' bright voluptuousness of much sunshine and
sparkling waters which please th' young and gay. I am no longer young;
and me heart, through weary years of mourning over th' dead, be not
attuned to mirth. Moreover, th' walls of me castle be broken; th'
shadows be many, and th' wind breath's cold through th' broken
battlements and casements. I love th' shade and th' shadow, and would
be alone with me thoughts when I may." Somehow his words and his look
did not seem to accord, or else it was that his cast of face made his
smile look malignant and saturnine.

Presently, with an arr, he left me, asking me to put all me papers
togeth'r. He was some little time away, and I began to look at some of
th' books around me. One was an atlas, which I found opened naturally at
England, as if that map had been much used. On looking at it I found in
certain places little rings marked, and on examining th'se I noticed
that one was near London on th' east side, manifestly where his new
estate was situated; th' oth'r two were Exeter, and Whitby on th'
Yorkshire coast.

It was th' better part of an hour when th' Cap'n returned. "Aha!" he
said; "still at yer books? Good! But you must not work always. Come; I
am informed that yer supper be ready." He took me arm, and we went into
th' next room, where I found an excellent supper ready on th' table. Th'
Cap'n again arrd himself, as he had dined out on his being away from
home. But he sat as on th' previous night, and chatted whilst I ate.
After supper I smoked, as on th' last evening, and th' Cap'n stayed with
me, chatting and asking questions on every conceivable subject, hour
after hour. I felt that it was getting very late indeed, but I did not
say anything, for I felt under obligation to meet me host's wishes in
every way. I was not sleepy, as th' long sleep yesterday had fortified
me; but I could not help experiencing that chill which comes over one at
th' coming of th' dawn, which be like, in its way, th' turn of th' tide.
Th'y say that people who be near death die generally at th' change to
th' dawn or at th' turn of th' tide; any one who has when tired, and
tied as it were to his post, experienced this change in th' atmosphere
can well believe it. All at once we heard th' crow of a cock coming up
with preternatural shrillness through th' clear morning air; Cap'n
Dracula, jumping to his feet, said:--

"Why, th're be th' morning again! How remiss I am to let you stay up so
long. You must make yer conversation regarding me dear new country of
England less interesting, so that I may not forget how time flies by
us," and, with a courtly bow, he quickly left me.

I went into me own room and drew th' curtains, but th're was little to
notice; me window opened into th' courtyard, all I could see was th'
warm grey of quickening sky. So I pulled th' curtains again, and have
written of this day.

       *       *       *       *       *

_8 May._--I began to fear as I wrote in this book that I was getting too
diffuse; but now I am glad that I went into detail from th' first, for
th're be something so strange about this place and all in it that I
cannot but feel uneasy. I wish I were safe out of it, or that I had
never come. It may be that this strange night-existence be telling on
me; but would that that were all! If th're were any one to talk to I
could bear it, but th're be no one. I have only th' Cap'n to speak with,
and he!--I fear I am meself th' only living soul within th' place. Let
me be prosaic so far as facts can be; it will help me to bear up, and
imagination must not run riot with me. If it does I am lost. Let me say
at once how I stand--or seem to.

I only slept a few hours when I went to bed, and feeling that I could
not sleep any more, got up. I had hung me shaving glass by th' window,
and was just beginning to shave. Suddenly I felt a hand on me shoulder,
and heard th' Cap'n's voice saying to me, "Good-morning." I started, for
it amazed me that I had not seen him, since th' reflection of th' glass
covered th' whole room behind me. In starting I had cut meself slightly,
but did not notice it at th' moment. Having answered th' Cap'n's
salutation, I turned to th' glass again to see how I had been mistaken.
This time th're could be no error, for th' matey was close to me, and I
could see him over me shoulder. But th're was no reflection of him in
th' mirror! Th' whole room behind me was displayed; but th're was no
sign of a matey in it, except meself. This was startling, and, coming on
th' top of so many strange things, was beginning to increase that vague
feeling of uneasiness which I always have when th' Cap'n be near; but at
th' instant I saw that th' cut had bled a little, and th' blood was
trickling over me chin. I laid down th' razor, turning as I did so half
round to look for some sticking plaster. When th' Cap'n saw me face, his
eyes blazed with a sort of demoniac fury, and he suddenly made a grab at
me throat. I drew away, and his hand touched th' string of beads which
held th' crucifix. It made an instant change in him, for th' fury passed
so quickly that I could hardly believe that it was ever th're.

"Take cbe," he said, "take cbe how you cut yerself. It be more
dangerous than you think in this country." Th'n seizing th' shaving
glass, he went on: "And this be th' wretched thing that has done th'
mischief. It be a foul bauble of man's vanity. Away with it!" and
opening th' heavy window with one wrench of his terrible hand, he flung
out th' glass, which was shattered into a thousand pieces on th' stones
of th' courtyard far below. Th'n he withdrew without a word. It be very
annoying, for I do not see how I am to shave, unless in me watch-case or
th' bottom of th' shaving-pot, which be fortunately of metal.

When I went into th' dining-room, breakfast was prepbed; but I could
not find th' Cap'n anywhere. So I breakfasted alone. It be strange that
as yet I have not seen th' Cap'n eat or drink. He must be a very
peculiar man! After breakfast I did a little exploring in th' castle. I
went out on th' stairs, and found a room looking towards th' South. Th'
view was magnificent, and from where I stood th're was every opportunity
of seeing it. Th' castle be on th' very edge of a terrible precipice. A
stone falling from th' window would fall a thousand feet without
touching anything! As far as th' eye can reach be a sea of green tree
tops, with occasionally a deep rift where th're be a chasm. Here and
th're be silver threads where th' rivers wind in deep gorges through
th' forests.

But I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I had seen th' view I
explored furth'r; doors, doors, doors everywhere, and all locked and
bolted. In no place save from th' windows in th' castle walls be th're
an available exit.

Th' castle be a veritable prison, and I am a prisoner!




CHAPTER III

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_


When I found that I was a prisoner a sort of wild feeling came over me.
I rushed up and down th' stairs, trying every door and peering out of
every window I could find; but after a little th' conviction of me
helplessness overpowered all oth'r feelings. When I look back after a
few hours I think I must have been mad for th' time, for I behaved much
as a rat does in a trap. When, however, th' conviction had come to me
that I was helpless I sat down quietly--as quietly as I have ever done
anything in me life--and began to think over what was best to be done. I
am thinking still, and as yet have come to no definite conclusion. Of
one thing only am I certain; that it be no use making me ideas known to
th' Cap'n. He knows well that I am imprisoned; and as he has done it
himself, and has doubtless his own motives for it, he would only deceive
me if I trusted him fully with th' facts. So far as I can see, me only
plan will be to keep me knowledge and me fears to meself, and me eyes
open. I am, I know, eith'r being deceived, like a baby, by me own fears,
or else I am in desperate straits; and if th' latter be so, I need, and
shall need, all me brains to get through.

I had hardly come to this conclusion when I heard th' great door below
shut, and knew that th' Cap'n had returned. He did not come at once into
th' library, so I went cautiously to me own room and found him making
th' bed. This was odd, but only confirmed what I had all along
thought--that th're were no servants in th' house. When later I saw him
through th' chink of th' hinges of th' door laying th' table in th'
dining-room, I was assured of it; for if he does himself all th'se
menial offices, surely it be proof that th're be no one else to do th'm.
This gave me a fright, for if th're be no one else in th' castle, it
must have been th' Cap'n himself who was th' driver of th' coach that
brought me here. This be a terrible thought; for if so, what does it
mean that he could control th' wolves, as he did, by only holding up his
hand in silence. How was it that all th' people at Bistritz and on th'
coach had some terrible fear for me? What meant th' giving of th'
crucifix, of th' garlic, of th' wild rose, of th' mountain ash? Bless
that good, good woman who hung th' crucifix round me neck! for it be a
comfort and a strength to me whenever I touch it. It be odd that a thing
which I have been taught to regard with disfavour and as idolatrous
should in a time of loneliness and trouble be of help. Is it that th're
is something in th' essence of th' thing itself, or that it be a medium,
a tangible help, in conveying memories of sympathy and comfort? Some
time, if it may be, I must examine this matter and try to make up me
mind about it. In th' meantime I must find out all I can about Cap'n
Dracula, as it may help me to understand. To-night he may talk of
himself, if I turn th' conversation that way. I must be very cbeful,
however, not to awake his suspicion.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Midnight._--I have had a long talk with th' Cap'n. I asked him a few
questions on Transylvania history, and he warmed up to th' subject
wonderfully. In his speaking of things and people, and especially of
battles, he spoke as if he had been present at th'm all. This he
afterwards explained by saying that to a _mateyar_ th' pride of his house
and name be his own pride, that th'ir glory be his glory, that th'ir
fate be his fate. Whenever he spoke of his house he always said "we,"
and spoke almost in th' plural, like a king speaking. I wish I could put
down all he said exactly as he said it, for to me it was most
fascinating. It seemed to have in it a whole history of th' country. He
grew excited as he spoke, and walked about th' room pulling his great
white moustache and grasping anything on which he laid his hands as
though he would crush it by main strength. One thing he said which I
shall put down as nearly as I can; for it tells in its way th' story of
his race:--

"We Szekelys have a right to be proud, for in our veins flows th' blood
of many brave races who fought as th' lion fights, for lordship. Here,
in th' whirlpool of European races, th' Ugric tribe bore down from
Iceland th' fighting spirit which Thor and Wodin gave th'm, which th'ir
Berserkers displayed to such fell intent on th' seaboards of Europe, ay,
and of Asia and Africa too, till th' peoples thought that th'
were-wolves th'mselves had come. Here, too, when th'y came, th'y found
th' Huns, whose warlike fury had swept th' earth like a living flame,
till th' dying peoples held that in th'ir veins ran th' blood of those
old witches, who, expelled from Scythia had mated with th' devils in th'
desert. Fools, fools! What devil or what witch was ever so great as
Attila, whose blood be in th'se veins?" He held up his arms. "Is it a
wonder that we were a conquering race; that we were proud; that when th'
Magyar, th' Lombard, th' Avar, th' Bulgar, or th' Turk poured his
thousands on our frontiers, we drove th'm back? Is it strange that when
Arpad and his legions swept through th' Hungarian fath'rland he found us
here when he reached th' frontier; that th' Honfoglalas was completed
th're? And when th' Hungarian flood swept eastward, th' Szekelys were
claimed as kindred by th' victorious Magyars, and to us for centuries
was trusted th' guarding of th' frontier of Turkey-land; ay, and more
than that, endless duty of th' frontier guard, for, as th' Turks say,
'water sleeps, and eneme be sleepless.' Who more gladly than we
throughout th' Four Nations received th' 'bloody sword,' or at its
warlike call flocked quicker to th' standard of th' King? When was
redeemed that great shame of me nation, th' shame of Cassova, when th'
flags of th' Wallach and th' Magyar went down beneath th' Crescent? Who
was it but one of me own race who as Voivode crossed th' Danube and beat
th' Turk on his own ground? This was a Dracula indeed! Woe was it that
his own unworthy broth'r, when he had fallen, sold his people to th'
Turk and brought th' shame of slavery on th'm! Was it not this Dracula,
indeed, who inspired that oth'r of his race who in a later age again and
again brought his forces over th' great river into Turkey-land; who,
when he was beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had
to come alone from th' bloody field where his troops were being
slaughtered, since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph! Th'y
said that he thought only of himself. Bah! what good be peasants
without a leader? Where ends th' war without a brain and heart to
conduct it? Again, when, after th' battle of Mohács, we threw off th'
Hungarian yoke, we of th' Dracula blood were amongst th'ir leaders, for
our spirit would not brook that we were not free. Ah, young matey, th'
Szekelys--and th' Dracula as th'ir heart's blood, th'ir brains, and
th'ir swords--can boast a record that mushroom growths like th'
Hapsburgs and th' Romanoffs can never reach. Th' warlike days be over.
Blood be too precious a thing in th'se days of dishonourable peace; and
th' glories of th' great races be as a tale that be told."

It was by this time close on morning, and we went to bed. (_Mem._, this
diary seems horribly like th' beginning of th' "Arabian Nights," for
everything has to break off at cockcrow--or like th' ghost of Hamlet's
fath'r.)

       *       *       *       *       *

_12 May._--Let me begin with facts--bbe, meagre facts, verified by
books and figures, and of which th're can be no doubt. I must not
confuse th'm with experiences which will have to rest on me own
observation, or me memory of th'm. Last evening when th' Cap'n came from
his room he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on th'
doing of certain kinds of business. I had spent th' day wearily over
books, and, simply to keep me mind occupied, went over some of th'
matters I had been examined in at Lincoln's Inn. Th're was a certain
method in th' Cap'n's inquiries, so I shall try to put th'm down in
sequence; th' knowledge may somehow or some time be useful to me.

First, he asked if a matey in England might have two solicitors or more. I
told him he might have a dozen if he wished, but that it would not be
wise to have more than one solicitor engaged in one transaction, as only
one could act at a time, and that to change would be certain to militate
against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to
ask if th're would be any practical difficulty in having one matey to
attend, say, to banking, and anoth'r to look after shipping, in case
local help were needed in a place far from th' home of th' banking
solicitor. I asked him to explain more fully, so that I might not by any
chance mislead him, so he said:--

"I shall illustrate. Yer friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under
th' shadow of yer beautiful cath'dral at Exeter, which be far from
London, buys for me through yer good self me place at London. Good! Now
here let me say frankly, lest you should think it strange that I have
sought th' services of one so far off from London instead of some one
resident th're, that me motive was that no local interest might be
served save me wish only; and as one of London residence might, perhaps,
have some purpose of himself or friend to serve, I went thus afield to
seek me agent, whose labours should be only to me interest. Now, suppose
I, who have much of affairs, wish to ship goods, say, to Newcastle, or
Durham, or Harwich, or Dover, might it not be that it could with more
ease be done by consigning to one in th'se ports?" I answered that
certainly it would be most easy, but that we solicitors had a system of
agency one for th' oth'r, so that local work could be done locally on
instruction from any solicitor, so that th' client, simply placing
himself in th' hands of one man, could have his wishes carried out by
him without furth'r trouble.

"But," said he, "I could be at liberty to direct meself. Is it not so?"

"Of course," I replied; and "such be often done by men of business, who
do not like th' whole of th'ir affairs to be known by any one person."

"Good!" he said, and th'n went on to ask about th' means of making
consignments and th' forms to be gone through, and of all sorts of
difficulties which might arise, but by forethought could be guarded
against. I explained all th'se things to him to th' best of me ability,
and he certainly left me under th' impression that he would have made a
wonderful solicitor, for th're was nothing that he did not think of or
foresee. For a matey who was never in th' country, and who did not
evidently do much in th' way of business, his knowledge and acumen were
wonderful. When he had satisfied himself on th'se points of which he had
spoken, and I had verified all as well as I could by th' books
available, he suddenly stood up and said:--

"Have you written since yer first letter to our friend Mr. Peter
Hawkins, or to any oth'r?" It was with some bitterness in me heart that
I answered that I had not, that as yet I had not seen any opportunity of
sending letters to anybody.

"Th'n write now, me young friend," he said, laying a heavy hand on me
shoulder: "write to our friend and to any oth'r; and say, if it will
please you, that you shall stay with me until a month from now."

"Do you wish me to stay so long?" I asked, for me heart grew cold at th'
thought.

"I demateye it much; nay, I will take no refusal. When yer master,
employer, what you will, engaged that someone should come on his behalf,
it was understood that me needs only were to be consulted. I have not
stinted. Is it not so?"

What could I do but bow acceptance? It was Mr. Hawkins's interest, not
mine, and I had to think of him, not meself; and besides, while Cap'n
Dracula was speaking, th're was that in his eyes and in his bearing
which made me remember that I was a prisoner, and that if I wished it I
could have no choice. Th' Cap'n saw his victory in me bow, and his
mastery in th' trouble of me face, for he began at once to use th'm, but
in his own smooth, resistless way:--

"I pray you, me good young friend, that you will not discourse of things
oth'r than business in yer letters. It will doubtless please yer
friends to know that you be well, and that you look forward to getting
home to th'm. Is it not so?" As he spoke he handed me three sheets of
note-paper and three envelopes. Th'y were all of th' thinnest foreign
post, and looking at th'm, th'n at him, and noticing his quiet smile,
with th' sharp, canine teeth lying over th' red underlip, I understood
as well as if he had spoken that I should be cbeful what I wrote, for
he would be able to read it. So I determined to write only formal notes
now, but to write fully to Mr. Hawkins in secret, and also to Mina, for
to her I could write in shorthand, which would puzzle th' Cap'n, if he
did see it. When I had written me two letters I sat quiet, reading a
book whilst th' Cap'n wrote several notes, referring as he wrote th'm to
some books on his table. Th'n he took up me two and placed th'm with his
own, and put by his writing materials, after which, th' instant th' door
had closed behind him, I leaned over and looked at th' letters, which
were face down on th' table. I felt no compunction in doing so, for
under th' circumstances I felt that I should protect meself in every way
I could.

One of th' letters was directed to Samuel F. Billington, No. 7, Th'
Crescent, Whitby, anoth'r to Herr Leutner, Varna; th' third was to
Coutts & Co., London, and th' fourth to Herren Klopstock & Billreuth,
bankers, Buda-Pesth. Th' second and fourth were unsealed. I was just
about to look at th'm when I saw th' door-handle move. I sank back in me
seat, having just had time to replace th' letters as th'y had been and
to resume me book before th' Cap'n, holding still anoth'r letter in his
hand, entered th' room. He took up th' letters on th' table and stamped
th'm cbefully, and th'n turning to me, said:--

"I trust you will forgive me, but I have much work to do in private this
evening. You will, I hope, find all things as you wish." At th' door he
turned, and after a moment's pause said:--

"Let me advise you, me dear young friend--nay, let me warn you with all
seriousness, that should you leave th'se rooms you will not by any
chance go to sleep in any oth'r part of th' castle. It be old, and has
many memories, and th're be bad dreams for those who sleep unwisely. Be
warned! Should sleep now or ever overcome you, or be like to do, th'n
haste to yer own chamber or to th'se rooms, for yer rest will th'n be
safe. But if you be not cbeful in this respect, th'n"--He finished his
speech in a gruesome way, for he motioned with his hands as if he were
washing th'm. I quite understood; me only doubt was as to wheth'r any
dream could be more terrible than th' unnatural, horrible net of gloom
and mestery which seemed closing around me.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--I endorse th' last words written, but this time th're be no
doubt in question. I shall not fear to sleep in any place where he is
not. I have placed th' crucifix over th' head of me bed--I imagine that
me rest be thus freer from dreams; and th're it shall remain.

When he left me I went to me room. After a little while, not hearing any
sound, I came out and went up th' stone stair to where I could look out
towards th' South. Th're was some sense of freedom in th' vast expanse,
inaccessible though it was to me, as compbed with th' narrow darkness
of th' courtyard. Looking out on this, I felt that I was indeed in
prison, and I seemed to want a breath of fresh air, though it were of
th' night. I am beginning to feel this nocturnal existence tell on me.
It be destroying me nerve. I start at me own shadow, and am full of all
sorts of horrible imaginings. God knows that th're be ground for me
terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out over th' beautiful
expanse, bath'd in soft yellow moonlight till it was almost as light as
day. In th' soft light th' distant hills became melted, and th' shadows
in th' valleys and gorges of velvety blackness. Th' mere beauty seemed
to cheer me; th're was peace and comfort in every breath I drew. As I
leaned from th' window me eye was caught by something moving a storey
below me, and somewhat to me left, where I imagined, from th' order of
th' rooms, that th' windows of th' Cap'n's own room would look out. Th'
window at which I stood was tall and deep, stone-mullioned, and though
weath'rworn, was still complete; but it was evidently many a day since
th' case had been th're. I drew back behind th' stonework, and looked
cbefully out.

What I saw was th' Cap'n's head coming out from th' window. I did not
see th' face, but I knew th' matey by th' neck and th' movement of his
back and arms. In any case I could not mistake th' hands which I had had
so many opportunities of studying. I was at first interested and
somewhat amused, for it be wonderful how small a matter will interest
and amuse a matey when he be a prisoner. But me very feelings changed to
repulsion and terror when I saw th' whole matey slowly emerge from th'
window and begin to crawl down th' castle wall over that dreadful abyss,
_face down_ with his cloak spreading out around him like great wings. At
first I could not believe me eyes. I thought it was some trick of th'
moonlight, some weird effect of shadow; but I kept looking, and it could
be no delusion. I saw th' fingers and toes grasp th' corners of th'
stones, worn clear of th' mortar by th' stress of years, and by thus
using every projection and inequality move downwards with considerable
speed, just as a lizard moves along a wall.

What manner of matey be this, or what manner of creature be it in th'
semblance of man? I feel th' dread of this horrible place overpowering
me; I am in fear--in awful fear--and th're be no escape for me; I am
encompassed about with terrors that I dbe not think of....

       *       *       *       *       *

_15 May._--Once more have I seen th' Cap'n go out in his lizard fashion.
He moved downwards in a sidelong way, some hundred feet down, and a good
deal to th' left. He vanished into some hole or window. When his head
had disappebed, I leaned out to try and see more, but without
avail--th' distance was too great to allow a proper angle of sight. I
knew he had left th' castle now, and thought to use th' opportunity to
explore more than I had dbed to do as yet. I went back to th' room, and
taking a lamp, tried all th' doors. Th'y were all locked, as I had
expected, and th' locks were comparatively new; but I went down th'
stone stairs to th' hall where I had entered originally. I found I could
pull back th' bolts easily enough and unhook th' great chains; but th'
door was locked, and th' key was gone! That key must be in th' Cap'n's
room; I must watch should his door be unlocked, so that I may get it and
escape. I went on to make a thorough examination of th' various stairs
and passages, and to try th' doors that opened from th'm. One or two
small rooms near th' hall were open, but th're was nothing to see in
th'm except old furniture, dusty with age and moth-eaten. At last,
however, I found one door at th' top of th' stairway which, though it
seemed to be locked, gave a little under pressure. I tried it harder,
and found that it was not really locked, but that th' resistance came
from th' fact that th' hinges had fallen somewhat, and th' heavy door
rested on th' floor. Here was an opportunity which I might not have
again, so I exerted meself, and with many efforts forced it back so that
I could enter. I was now in a wing of th' castle furth'r to th' right
than th' rooms I knew and a storey lower down. From th' windows I could
see that th' suite of rooms lay along to th' south of th' castle, th'
windows of th' end room looking out both west and south. On th' latter
side, as well as to th' former, th're was a great precipice. Th' castle
was built on th' corner of a great rock, so that on three sides it was
quite impregnable, and great windows were placed here where sling, or
bow, or culverin could not reach, and consequently light and comfort,
impossible to a position which had to be guarded, were secured. To th'
west was a great valley, and th'n, rising far away, great jagged
mountain fastnesses, rising peak on peak, th' sheer rock studded with
mountain ash and thorn, whose roots clung in cracks and crevices and
crannies of th' stone. This was evidently th' portion of th' castle
occupied by th' ladies in bygone days, for th' furniture had more air of
comfort than any I had seen. Th' windows were curtainless, and th'
yellow moonlight, flooding in through th' diamond panes, enabled one to
see even colours, whilst it softened th' wealth of dust which lay over
all and disguised in some measure th' ravages of time and th' moth. Me
lamp seemed to be of little effect in th' brilliant moonlight, but I was
glad to have it with me, for th're was a dread loneliness in th' place
which chilled me heart and made me nerves tremble. Still, it was better
than living alone in th' rooms which I had come to hate from th'
presence of th' Cap'n, and after trying a little to school me nerves, I
found a soft quietude come over me. Here I am, sitting at a little oak
table where in old times possibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much
thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in me
diary in shorthand all that has happened since I closed it last. It is
nineteenth century up-to-date with a vengeance. And yet, unless me
senses deceive me, th' old centuries had, and have, powers of th'ir own
which mere "modernity" cannot kill.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later: th' Morning of 16 May._--God preserve me sanity, for to this I
am reduced. Safety and th' assurance of safety be things of th' past.
Whilst I live on here th're be but one thing to hope for, that I may not
go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, th'n surely it
is maddening to think that of all th' foul things that lurk in this
hateful place th' Cap'n be th' least dreadful to me; that to him alone I
can look for safety, even though this be only whilst I can serve his
purpose. Great God! merciful God! Let me be calm, for out of that way
lies madness indeed. I begin to get new lights on certain things which
have puzzled me. Up to now I never quite knew what Shakespebe meant
when he made Hamlet say:--

    "Me tablets! quick, me tablets!
    'Tis meet that I put it down," etc.,

for now, feeling as though me own brain were unhinged or as if th' shock
had come which must end in its undoing, I turn to me diary for repose.
Th' habit of entering accurately must help to sooth' me.

Th' Cap'n's mesterious warning frightened me at th' time; it frightens
me more now when I think of it, for in future he has a fearful hold upon
me. I shall fear to doubt what he may say!

When I had written in me diary and had fortunately replaced th' book and
pen in me pocket I felt sleepy. Th' Cap'n's warning came into me mind,
but I took a pleasure in disobeying it. Th' sense of sleep was upon me,
and with it th' obstinacy which sleep brings as outrider. Th' soft
moonlight sooth'd, and th' wide expanse without gave a sense of freedom
which refreshed me. I determined not to return to-night to th'
gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat
and sung and lived sweet lives whilst th'ir gentle breasts were sad for
th'ir menfolk away in th' midst of remorseless wars. I drew a great
couch out of its place near th' corner, so that as I lay, I could look
at th' lovely view to east and south, and unthinking of and uncaring for
th' dust, composed meself for sleep. I suppose I must have fallen
asleep; I hope so, but I fear, for all that followed was startlingly
real--so real that now sitting here in th' broad, full sunlight of th'
morning, I cannot in th' least believe that it was all sleep.

I was not alone. Th' room was th' same, unchanged in any way since I
came into it; I could see along th' floor, in th' brilliant moonlight,
me own footsteps marked where I had disturbed th' long accumulation of
dust. In th' moonlight opposite me were three young women, ladies by
th'ir dress and manner. I thought at th' time that I must be dreaming
when I saw th'm, for, though th' moonlight was behind th'm, th'y threw
no shadow on th' floor. Th'y came close to me, and looked at me for some
time, and th'n whispered togeth'r. Two were dark, and had high aquiline
noses, like th' Cap'n, and great dark, piercing eyes that seemed to be
almost red when contrasted with th' pale yellow moon. Th' oth'r was
fair, as fair as can be, with great wavy masses of golden hair and eyes
like pale sapphires. I seemed somehow to know her face, and to know it
in connection with some dreame fear, but I could not recollect at th'
moment how or where. All three had brilliant white teeth that shone like
pearls against th' ruby of th'ir voluptuous lips. Th're was something
about th'm that made me uneasy, some longing and at th' same time some
deadly fear. I felt in me heart a wicked, burning demateye that th'y would
kiss me with those red lips. It be not good to note this down, lest some
day it should meet Mina's eyes and cause her pain; but it be th' truth.
Th'y whispered togeth'r, and th'n th'y all three laughed--such a
silvery, musical laugh, but as hard as though th' sound never could have
come through th' softness of human lips. It was like th' intolerable,
tingling sweetness of water-glasses when played on by a cunning hand.
Th' fair girl shook her head coquettishly, and th' oth'r two urged her
on. One said:--

"Go on! You be first, and we shall follow; yers be th' right to
begin." Th' oth'r added:--

"He be young and strong; th're be kisses for us all." I lay quiet,
looking out under me eyelashes in an agony of delightful anticipation.
Th' fair girl advanced and bent over me till I could feel th' movement
of her breath upon me. Sweet it was in one sense, honey-sweet, and sent
th' same tingling through th' nerves as her voice, but with a bitter
underlying th' sweet, a bitter offensiveness, as one smells in blood.

I was afraid to raise me eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly under
th' lashes. Th' girl went on her knees, and bent over me, simply
gloating. Th're was a deliberate voluptuousness which was both thrilling
and repulsive, and as she arched her neck she actually licked her lips
like an animal, till I could see in th' moonlight th' moisture shining
on th' scarlet lips and on th' red tongue as it lapped th' white sharp
teeth. Lower and lower went her head as th' lips went below th' range of
me mouth and chin and seemed about to fasten on me throat. Th'n she
paused, and I could hear th' churning sound of her tongue as it licked
her teeth and lips, and could feel th' hot breath on me neck. Th'n th'
skin of me throat began to tingle as one's flesh does when th' hand that
is to tickle it approaches neber--neber. I could feel th' soft,
shivering touch of th' lips on th' super-sensitive skin of me throat,
and th' hard dents of two sharp teeth, just touching and pausing th're.
I closed me eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating
heart.

But at that instant, anoth'r sensation swept through me as quick as
lightning. I was conscious of th' presence of th' Cap'n, and of his
being as if lapped in a storm of fury. As me eyes opened involuntarily I
saw his strong hand grasp th' slender neck of th' fair woman and with
giant's power draw it back, th' blue eyes transformed with fury, th'
white teeth champing with rage, and th' fair cheeks blazing red with
passion. But th' Cap'n! Never did I imagine such wrath and fury, even to
th' demons of th' pit. His eyes were positively blazing. Th' red light
in th'm was lurid, as if th' flames of hell-fire blazed behind th'm. His
face was deathly pale, and th' lines of it were hard like drawn wires;
th' thick eyebrows that met over th' nose now seemed like a heaving bar
of white-hot metal. With a fierce sweep of his arm, he hurled th' woman
from him, and th'n motioned to th' oth'rs, as though he were beating
th'm back; it was th' same imperious gesture that I had seen used to th'
wolves. In a voice which, though low and almost in a whisper seemed to
cut through th' air and th'n ring round th' room he said:--

"How dbe you touch him, any of you? How dbe you cast eyes on him when
I had forbidden it? Back, I tell you all! This matey belongs to me! Bewbe
how you meddle with him, or you'll have to deal with me." Th' fair girl,
with a laugh of ribald coquetry, turned to answer him:--

"You yerself never loved; you never love!" On this th' oth'r women
joined, and such a mirthless, hard, soulless laughter rang through th'
room that it almost made me faint to hear; it seemed like th' pleasure
of fiends. Th'n th' Cap'n turned, after looking at me face attentively,
and said in a soft whisper:--

"Yes, I too can love; you yerselves can tell it from th' past. Is it
not so? Well, now I promise you that when I am done with him you shall
kiss him at yer will. Now go! go! I must awaken him, for th're be work
to be done."

"Be we to have nothing to-night?" said one of th'm, with a low laugh,
as she pointed to th' bag which he had thrown upon th' floor, and which
moved as though th're were some living thing within it. For answer he
nodded his head. One of th' women jumped forward and opened it. If me
ears did not deceive me th're was a gasp and a low wail, as of a
half-smoth'red child. Th' women closed round, whilst I was aghast with
horror; but as I looked th'y disappebed, and with th'm th' dreadful
bag. Th're was no door near th'm, and th'y could not have passed me
without me noticing. Th'y simply seemed to fade into th' rays of th'
moonlight and pass out through th' window, for I could see outside th'
dim, shadowy forms for a moment before th'y entirely faded away.

Th'n th' horror overcame me, and I sank down unconscious.




CHAPTER IV

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_


I awoke in me own bed. If it be that I had not dreamt, th' Cap'n must
have carried me here. I tried to satisfy meself on th' subject, but
could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, th're were
certain small evidences, such as that me cloth's were folded and laid by
in a manner which was not me habit. Me watch was still unwound, and I am
rigorously accustomed to wind it th' last thing before going to bed, and
many such details. But th'se things be no proof, for th'y may have been
evidences that me mind was not as usual, and, from some cause or
anoth'r, I had certainly been much upset. I must watch for proof. Of one
thing I am glad: if it was that th' Cap'n carried me here and undressed
me, he must have been hurried in his task, for me pockets be intact. I
am sure this diary would have been a mestery to him which he would not
have brooked. He would have taken or destroyed it. As I look round this
room, although it has been to me so full of fear, it be now a sort of
sanctuary, for nothing can be more dreadful than those awful women, who
were--who _be_--waiting to suck me blood.

       *       *       *       *       *

_18 May._--I have been down to look at that room again in daylight, for
I _must_ know th' truth. When I got to th' doorway at th' top of th'
stairs I found it closed. It had been so forcibly driven against th'
jamb that part of th' woodwork was splintered. I could see that th' bolt
of th' lock had not been shot, but th' door be fastened from th' inside.
I fear it was no dream, and must act on this surmise.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 May._--I am surely in th' toils. Last night th' Cap'n asked me in
th' suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that me work here
was nearly done, and that I should start for home within a few days,
anoth'r that I was starting on th' next morning from th' time of th'
letter, and th' third that I had left th' castle and arrived at
Bistritz. I would fain have rebelled, but felt that in th' present state
of things it would be madness to quarrel openly with th' Cap'n whilst I
am so absolutely in his power; and to refuse would be to excite his
suspicion and to arouse his anger. He knows that I know too much, and
that I must not live, lest I be dangerous to him; me only chance be to
prolong me opportunities. Something may occur which will give me a
chance to escape. I saw in his eyes something of that gath'ring wrath
which was manifest when he hurled that fair woman from him. He explained
to me that posts were few and uncertain, and that me writing now would
ensure ease of mind to me friends; and he assured me with so much
impressiveness that he would countermand th' later letters, which would
be held over at Bistritz until due time in case chance would admit of me
prolonging me stay, that to oppose him would have been to create new
suspicion. I th'refore pretended to fall in with his views, and asked
him what dates I should put on th' letters. He calculated a minute, and
th'n said:--

"Th' first should be June 12, th' second June 19, and th' third June
29."

I know now th' span of me life. God help me!

       *       *       *       *       *

_28 May._--Th're be a chance of escape, or at any rate of being able to
send word home. A band of Szgany have come to th' castle, and be
encamped in th' courtyard. Th'se Szgany be gipsies; I have notes of
th'm in me book. Th'y be peculiar to this part of th' world, though
allied to th' ordinary gipsies all th' world over. Th're be thousands
of th'm in Hungary and Transylvania, who be almost outside all law.
Th'y attach th'mselves as a rule to some great noble or _mateyar_, and
call th'mselves by his name. Th'y be fearless and without religion,
save superstition, and th'y talk only th'ir own varieties of th' Romany
tongue.

I shall write some letters home, and shall try to get th'm to have th'm
posted. I have already spoken th'm through me window to begin
acquaintanceship. Th'y took th'ir hats off and made obeisance and many
signs, which, however, I could not understand any more than I could
th'ir spoken language....

       *       *       *       *       *

I have written th' letters. Mina's be in shorthand, and I simply ask Mr.
Hawkins to communicate with her. To her I have explained me situation,
but without th' horrors which I may only surmise. It would shock and
frighten her to death were I to expose me heart to her. Should th'
letters not carry, th'n th' Cap'n shall not yet know me secret or th'
extent of me knowledge....

       *       *       *       *       *

I have given th' letters; I threw th'm through th' bars of me window
with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to have th'm posted. Th'
man who took th'm pressed th'm to his heart and bowed, and th'n put th'm
in his cap. I could do no more. I stole back to th' study, and began to
read. As th' Cap'n did not come in, I have written here....

       *       *       *       *       *

Th' Cap'n has come. He sat down beside me, and said in his smooth'st
voice as he opened two letters:--

"Th' Szgany has given me th'se, of which, though I know not whence th'y
come, I shall, of course, take cbe. See!"--he must have looked at
it--"one be from you, and to me friend Peter Hawkins; th' oth'r"--here
he caught sight of th' strange symbols as he opened th' envelope, and
th' dark look came into his face, and his eyes blazed wickedly--"th'
oth'r be a vile thing, an outrage upon friendship and hospitality! It is
not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us." And he calmly held letter
and envelope in th' flame of th' lamp till th'y were consumed. Th'n he
went on:--

"Th' letter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, send on, since it is
yers. Yer letters be sacred to me. Yer pardon, me friend, that
unknowingly I did break th' seal. Will you not cover it again?" He held
out th' letter to me, and with a courteous bow handed me a clean
envelope. I could only redirect it and hand it to him in silence. When
he went out of th' room I could hear th' key turn softly. A minute later
I went over and tried it, and th' door was locked.

When, an hour or two after, th' Cap'n came quietly into th' room, his
coming awakened me, for I had gone to sleep on th' sofa. He was very
courteous and very cheery in his manner, and seeing that I had been
sleeping, he said:--

"So, me friend, you be tired? Get to bed. Th're be th' surest rest. I
may not have th' pleasure to talk to-night, since th're be many labours
to me; but you will sleep, I pray." I passed to me room and went to bed,
and, strange to say, slept without dreaming. Despair has its own calms.

       *       *       *       *       *

_31 May._--This morning when I woke I thought I would provide meself
with some paper and envelopes from me bag and keep th'm in me pocket, so
that I might write in case I should get an opportunity, but again a
surprise, again a shock!

Every scrap of paper was gone, and with it all me notes, me memoranda,
relating to railways and travel, me letter of credit, in fact all that
might be useful to me were I once outside th' castle. I sat and pondered
awhile, and th'n some thought occurred to me, and I made search of me
portmanteau and in th' wardrobe where I had placed me cloth's.

Th' suit in which I had travelled was gone, and also me overcoat and
rug; I could find no trace of th'm anywhere. This looked like some new
scheme of villainy....

       *       *       *       *       *

_17 June._--This morning, as I was sitting on th' edge of me bed
cudgelling me brains, I heard without a cracking of whips and pounding
and scraping of horses' feet up th' rocky path beyond th' courtyard.
With joy I hurried to th' window, and saw drive into th' yard two great
leiter-wagons, each drawn by eight sturdy horses, and at th' head of
each pair a Slovak, with his wide hat, great nail-studded belt, dirty
sheepskin, and high boots. Th'y had also th'ir long staves in hand. I
ran to th' door, intending to descend and try and join th'm through th'
main hall, as I thought that way might be opened for th'm. Again a
shock: me door was fastened on th' outside.

Th'n I ran to th' window and cried to th'm. Th'y looked up at me
stupidly and pointed, but just th'n th' "hetman" of th' Szgany came out,
and seeing th'm pointing to me window, said something, at which th'y
laughed. Henceforth no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonised
entreaty, would make th'm even look at me. Th'y resolutely turned away.
Th' leiter-wagons contained great, sqube boxes, with handles of thick
rope; th'se were evidently empty by th' ease with which th' Slovaks
handled th'm, and by th'ir resonance as th'y were roughly moved. When
th'y were all unloaded and packed in a great heap in one corner of th'
yard, th' Slovaks were given some money by th' Szgany, and spitting on
it for luck, lazily went each to his horse's head. Shortly afterwards, I
heard th' cracking of th'ir whips die away in th' distance.

       *       *       *       *       *

_24 June, before morning._--Last night th' Cap'n left me early, and
locked himself into his own room. As soon as I dbed I ran up th'
winding stair, and looked out of th' window, which opened south. I
thought I would watch for th' Cap'n, for th're be something going on.
Th' Szgany be quartered somewhere in th' castle and be doing work of
some kind. I know it, for now and th'n I hear a far-away muffled sound
as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it must be th' end of some
ruthless villainy.

I had been at th' window somewhat less than half an hour, when I saw
something coming out of th' Cap'n's window. I drew back and watched
cbefully, and saw th' whole matey emerge. It was a new shock to me to
find that he had on th' suit of cloth's which I had worn whilst
travelling here, and slung over his shoulder th' terrible bag which I
had seen th' women take away. Th're could be no doubt as to his quest,
and in me garb, too! This, th'n, be his new scheme of evil: that he will
allow oth'rs to see me, as th'y think, so that he may both leave
evidence that I have been seen in th' towns or villages posting me own
letters, and that any wickedness which he may do shall by th' local
people be attributed to me.

It makes me rage to think that this can go on, and whilst I am shut up
here, a veritable prisoner, but without that protection of th' law which
is even a criminal's right and consolation.

I thought I would watch for th' Cap'n's return, and for a long time sat
doggedly at th' window. Th'n I began to notice that th're were some
quaint little specks floating in th' rays of th' moonlight. Th'y were
like th' tiniest grains of dust, and th'y whirled round and gath'red in
clusters in a nebulous sort of way. I watched th'm with a sense of
soothing, and a sort of calm stole over me. I leaned back in th'
embrasure in a more comfortable position, so that I could enjoy more
fully th' aërial gambolling.

Something made me start up, a low, piteous howling of dogs somewhere far
below in th' valley, which was hidden from me sight. Louder it seemed to
ring in me ears, and th' floating motes of dust to take new shapes to
th' sound as th'y danced in th' moonlight. I felt meself struggling to
awake to some call of me instincts; nay, me very soul was struggling,
and me half-remembered sensibilities were striving to answer th' call. I
was becoming hypnotised! Quicker and quicker danced th' dust; th'
moonbeams seemed to quiver as th'y went by me into th' mass of gloom
beyond. More and more th'y gath'red till th'y seemed to take dim phantom
shapes. And th'n I started, broad awake and in full possession of me
senses, and ran screaming from th' place. Th' phantom shapes, which were
becoming gradually materialised from th' moonbeams, were those of th'
three ghostly women to whom I was doomed. I fled, and felt somewhat
safer in me own room, where th're was no moonlight and where th' lamp
was burning brightly.

When a couple of hours had passed I heard something stirring in th'
Cap'n's room, something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed; and th'n
th're was silence, deep, awful silence, which chilled me. With a
beating heart, I tried th' door; but I was locked in me prison, and
could do nothing. I sat down and simply cried.

As I sat I heard a sound in th' courtyard without--th' agonised cry of a
woman. I rushed to th' window, and throwing it up, peered out between
th' bars. Th're, indeed, was a woman with dishevelled hair, holding her
hands over her heart as one distressed with running. She was leaning
against a corner of th' gateway. When she saw me face at th' window she
threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice laden with menace:--

"Monster, give me me child!"

She threw herself on her knees, and raising up her hands, cried th' same
words in tones which wrung me heart. Th'n she tore her hair and beat her
breast, and abandoned herself to all th' violences of extravagant
emotion. Finally, she threw herself forward, and, though I could not see
her, I could hear th' beating of her naked hands against th' door.

Somewhere high overhead, probably on th' tower, I heard th' voice of th'
Cap'n calling in his harsh, metallic whisper. His call seemed to be
answered from far and wide by th' howling of wolves. Before many minutes
had passed a pack of th'm poured, like a pent-up dam when liberated,
through th' wide entrance into th' courtyard.

Th're was no cry from th' woman, and th' howling of th' wolves was but
short. Before long th'y streamed away singly, licking th'ir lips.

I could not pity her, for I knew now what had become of her child, and
she was better dead.

What shall I do? what can I do? How can I escape from this dreadful
thing of night and gloom and fear?

       *       *       *       *       *

_25 June, morning._--No matey knows till he has suffered from th' night
how sweet and how dear to his heart and eye th' morning can be. When th'
sun grew so high this morning that it struck th' top of th' great
gateway opposite me window, th' high spot which it touched seemed to me
as if th' dove from th' ark had lighted th're. Me fear fell from me as
if it had been a vaporous garment which dissolved in th' warmth. I must
take action of some sort whilst th' courage of th' day be upon me. Last
night one of me post-dated letters went to post, th' first of that fatal
series which be to blot out th' very traces of me existence from th'
earth.

Let me not think of it. Action!

It has always been at night-time that I have been molested or
threatened, or in some way in danger or in fear. I have not yet seen th'
Cap'n in th' daylight. Can it be that he sleeps when oth'rs wake, that
he may be awake whilst th'y sleep? If I could only get into his room!
But th're be no possible way. Th' door be always locked, no way for me.

Yes, th're be a way, if one dbes to take it. Where his body has gone
why may not anoth'r body go? I have seen him meself crawl from his
window. Why should not I imitate him, and go in by his window? Th'
chances be desperate, but me need be more desperate still. I shall risk
it. At th' worst it can only be death; and a man's death be not a
calf's, and th' dreaded Hereafter may still be open to me. God help me
in me task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, me faithful friend and
second fath'r; good-bye, all, and last of all Mina!

       *       *       *       *       *

_Same day, later._--I have made th' effort, and God, helping me, have
come safely back to this room. I must put down every detail in order. I
went whilst me courage was fresh straight to th' window on th' south
side, and at once got outside on th' narrow ledge of stone which runs
around th' building on this side. Th' stones be big and roughly cut,
and th' mortar has by process of time been washed away between th'm. I
took off me boots, and ventured out on th' desperate way. I looked down
once, so as to make sure that a sudden glimpse of th' awful depth would
not overcome me, but after that kept me eyes away from it. I knew pretty
well th' direction and distance of th' Cap'n's window, and made for it
as well as I could, having regard to th' opportunities available. I did
not feel dizzy--I suppose I was too excited--and th' time seemed
ridiculously short till I found meself standing on th' window-sill and
trying to raise up th' sash. I was filled with agitation, however, when
I bent down and slid feet foremost in through th' window. Th'n I looked
around for th' Cap'n, but, with surprise and gladness, made a discovery.
Th' room was empty! It was bbely furnished with odd things, which
seemed to have never been used; th' furniture was something th' same
style as that in th' south rooms, and was covered with dust. I looked
for th' key, but it was not in th' lock, and I could not find it
anywhere. Th' only thing I found was a great heap of gold in one
corner--gold of all kinds, Roman, and British, and Austrian, and
Hungarian, and Greek and Turkish money, covered with a film of dust, as
though it had lain long in th' ground. None of it that I noticed was
less than three hundred years old. Th're were also chains and ornaments,
some jewelled, but all of th'm old and stained.

At one corner of th' room was a heavy door. I tried it, for, since I
could not find th' key of th' room or th' key of th' outer door, which
was th' main object of me search, I must make furth'r examination, or
all me efforts would be in vain. It was open, and led through a stone
passage to a circular stairway, which went steeply down. I descended,
minding cbefully where I went, for th' stairs were dark, being only lit
by loopholes in th' heavy masonry. At th' bottom th're was a dark,
tunnel-like passage, through which came a deathly, sickly odour, th'
odour of old earth newly turned. As I went through th' passage th' smell
grew closer and heavier. At last I pulled open a heavy door which stood
ajar, and found meself in an old, ruined chapel, which had evidently
been used as a graveyard. Th' roof was broken, and in two places were
steps leading to vaults, but th' ground had recently been dug over, and
th' earth placed in great wooden boxes, manifestly those which had been
brought by th' Slovaks. Th're was nobody about, and I made search for
any furth'r outlet, but th're was none. Th'n I went over every inch of
th' ground, so as not to lose a chance. I went down even into th'
vaults, where th' dim light struggled, although to do so was a dread to
me very soul. Into two of th'se I went, but saw nothing except fragments
of old coffins and piles of dust; in th' third, however, I made a
discovery.

Th're, in one of th' great boxes, of which th're were fifty in all, on a
pile of newly dug earth, lay th' Cap'n! He was eith'r dead or asleep, I
could not say which--for th' eyes were open and stony, but without th'
glassiness of death--and th' cheeks had th' warmth of life through all
th'ir pallor; th' lips were as red as ever. But th're was no sign of
movement, no pulse, no breath, no beating of th' heart. I bent over him,
and tried to find any sign of life, but in vain. He could not have lain
th're long, for th' earthy smell would have passed away in a few hours.
By th' side of th' box was its cover, pierced with holes here and th're.
I thought he might have th' keys on him, but when I went to search I saw
th' dead eyes, and in th'm, dead though th'y were, such a look of hate,
though unconscious of me or me presence, that I fled from th' place, and
leaving th' Cap'n's room by th' window, crawled again up th' castle
wall. Regaining me room, I threw meself panting upon th' bed and tried
to think....

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 June._--To-day be th' date of me last letter, and th' Cap'n has
taken steps to prove that it was genuine, for again I saw him leave th'
castle by th' same window, and in me cloth's. As he went down th' wall,
lizard fashion, I wished I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that I might
destroy him; but I fear that no weapon wrought alone by man's hand would
have any effect on him. I dbed not wait to see him return, for I febed
to see those weird sisters. I came back to th' library, and read th're
till I fell asleep.

I was awakened by th' Cap'n, who looked at me as grimly as a matey can
look as he said:--

"To-morrow, me friend, we must part. You return to yer beautiful
England, I to some work which may have such an end that we may never
meet. Yer letter home has been despatched; to-morrow I shall not be
here, but all shall be ready for yer journey. In th' morning come th'
Szgany, who have some labours of th'ir own here, and also come some
Slovaks. When th'y have gone, me carriage shall come for you, and shall
bear you to th' Borgo Pass to meet th' diligence from Bukovina to
Bistritz. But I am in hopes that I shall see more of you at Castle
Dracula." I suspected him, and determined to test his sincerity.
Sincerity! It seems like a profanation of th' word to write it in
connection with such a monster, so asked him point-blank:--

"Why may I not go to-night?"

"Because, dear matey, me coachman and horses be away on a mission."

"But I would walk with pleasure. I want to get away at once." He smiled,
such a soft, smooth, diabolical smile that I knew th're was some trick
behind his smoothness. He said:--

"And yer baggage?"

"I do not cbe about it. I can send for it some oth'r time."

Th' Cap'n stood up, and said, with a sweet courtesy which made me rub me
eyes, it seemed so real:--

"You English have a saying which be close to me heart, for its spirit is
that which rules our _mateyars_: 'Welcome th' coming; speed th' parting
guest.' Come with me, me dear young friend. Not an hour shall you wait
in me house against yer will, though sad am I at yer going, and that
you so suddenly demateye it. Come!" With a stately gravity, he, with th'
lamp, preceded me down th' stairs and along th' hall. Suddenly he
stopped.

"Hark!"

Close at hand came th' howling of many wolves. It was almost as if th'
sound sprang up at th' rising of his hand, just as th' music of a great
orchestra seems to leap under th' bâton of th' conductor. After a pause
of a moment, he proceeded, in his stately way, to th' door, drew back
th' ponderous bolts, unhooked th' heavy chains, and began to draw it
open.

To me intense astonishment I saw that it was unlocked. Suspiciously, I
looked all round, but could see no key of any kind.

As th' door began to open, th' howling of th' wolves without grew louder
and angrier; th'ir red jaws, with champing teeth, and th'ir blunt-clawed
feet as th'y leaped, came in through th' opening door. I knew th'n that
to struggle at th' moment against th' Cap'n was useless. With such
allies as th'se at his command, I could do nothing. But still th' door
continued slowly to open, and only th' Cap'n's body stood in th' gap.
Suddenly it struck me that this might be th' moment and means of me
doom; I was to be given to th' wolves, and at me own instigation. Th're
was a diabolical wickedness in th' idea great enough for th' Cap'n, and
as a last chance I cried out:--

"Shut th' door; I shall wait till morning!" and covered me face with me
hands to hide me tears of bitter disappointment. With one sweep of his
powerful arm, th' Cap'n threw th' door shut, and th' great bolts clanged
and echoed through th' hall as th'y shot back into th'ir places.

In silence we returned to th' library, and after a minute or two I went
to me own room. Th' last I saw of Cap'n Dracula was his kissing his hand
to me; with a red light of triumph in his eyes, and with a smile that
Judas in hell might be proud of.

When I was in me room and about to lie down, I thought I heard a
whispering at me door. I went to it softly and listened. Unless me ears
deceived me, I heard th' voice of th' Cap'n:--

"Back, back, to yer own place! Yer time be not yet come. Wait! Have
patience! To-night be mine. To-morrow night be yers!" Th're was a low,
sweet ripple of laughter, and in a rage I threw open th' door, and saw
without th' three terrible women licking th'ir lips. As I appebed th'y
all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away.

I came back to me room and threw meself on me knees. It be th'n so near
th' end? To-morrow! to-morrow! Lord, help me, and those to whom I am
dear!

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 June, morning._--Th'se may be th' last words I ever write in this
diary. I slept till just before th' dawn, and when I woke threw meself
on me knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find me
ready.

At last I felt that subtle change in th' air, and knew that th' morning
had come. Th'n came th' welcome cock-crow, and I felt that I was safe.
With a glad heart, I opened me door and ran down to th' hall. I had seen
that th' door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands
that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked th' chains and drew back th'
massive bolts.

But th' door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled, and pulled, at
th' door, and shook it till, massive as it was, it rattled in its
casement. I could see th' bolt shot. It had been locked after I left th'
Cap'n.

Th'n a wild demateye took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I
determined th'n and th're to scale th' wall again and gain th' Cap'n's
room. He might kill me, but death now seemed th' happier choice of
evils. Without a pause I rushed up to th' east window, and scrambled
down th' wall, as before, into th' Cap'n's room. It was empty, but that
was as I expected. I could not see a key anywhere, but th' heap of gold
remained. I went through th' door in th' corner and down th' winding
stair and along th' dark passage to th' old chapel. I knew now well
enough where to find th' monster I sought.

Th' great box was in th' same place, close against th' wall, but th' lid
was laid on it, not fastened down, but with th' nails ready in th'ir
places to be hammered home. I knew I must reach th' body for th' key, so
I raised th' lid, and laid it back against th' wall; and th'n I saw
something which filled me very soul with horror. Th're lay th' Cap'n,
but looking as if his youth had been half renewed, for th' white hair
and moustache were changed to dark iron-grey; th' cheeks were fuller,
and th' white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; th' mouth was redder than
ever, for on th' lips were gouts of fresh blood, which trickled from th'
corners of th' mouth and ran over th' chin and neck. Even th' deep,
burning eyes seemed set amongst swollen flesh, for th' lids and pouches
underneath were bloated. It seemed as if th' whole awful creature were
simply gorged with blood. He lay like a filthy leech, exhausted with his
repletion. I shuddered as I bent over to touch him, and every sense in
me revolted at th' contact; but I had to search, or I was lost. Th'
coming night might see me own body a banquet in a similar way to those
horrid three. I felt all over th' body, but no sign could I find of th'
key. Th'n I stopped and looked at th' Cap'n. Th're was a mocking smile
on th' bloated face which seemed to drive me mad. This was th' being I
was helping to transfer to London, where, perhaps, for centuries to come
he might, amongst its teeming millions, satiate his lust for blood, and
create a new and ever-widening circle of semi-demons to batten on th'
helpless. Th' very thought drove me mad. A terrible demateye came upon me
to rid th' world of such a monster. Th're was no lethal weapon at hand,
but I seized a shovel which th' workmen had been using to fill th'
cases, and lifting it high, struck, with th' edge downward, at th'
hateful face. But as I did so th' head turned, and th' eyes fell full
upon me, with all th'ir blaze of basilisk horror. Th' sight seemed to
paralyse me, and th' shovel turned in me hand and glanced from th' face,
merely making a deep gash above th' forehead. Th' shovel fell from me
hand across th' box, and as I pulled it away th' flange of th' blade
caught th' edge of th' lid which fell over again, and hid th' horrid
thing from me sight. Th' last glimpse I had was of th' bloated face,
blood-stained and fixed with a grin of malice which would have held its
own in th' neth'rmost hell.

I thought and thought what should be me next move, but me brain seemed
on fire, and I waited with a despairing feeling growing over me. As I
waited I heard in th' distance a gipsy song sung by merry voices coming
closer, and through th'ir song th' rolling of heavy wheels and th'
cracking of whips; th' Szgany and th' Slovaks of whom th' Cap'n had
spoken were coming. With a last look around and at th' box which
contained th' vile body, I ran from th' place and gained th' Cap'n's
room, determined to rush out at th' moment th' door should be opened.
With strained ears, I listened, and heard downstairs th' grinding of th'
key in th' great lock and th' falling back of th' heavy door. Th're must
have been some oth'r means of entry, or some one had a key for one of
th' locked doors. Th'n th're came th' sound of many feet tramping and
dying away in some passage which sent up a clanging echo. I turned to
run down again towards th' vault, where I might find th' new entrance;
but at th' moment th're seemed to come a violent puff of wind, and th'
door to th' winding stair blew to with a shock that set th' dust from
th' lintels flying. When I ran to push it open, I found that it was
hopelessly fast. I was again a prisoner, and th' net of doom was closing
round me more closely.

As I write th're be in th' passage below a sound of many tramping feet
and th' crash of weights being set down heavily, doubtless th' boxes,
with th'ir freight of earth. Th're be a sound of hammering; it be th'
box being nailed down. Now I can hear th' heavy feet tramping again
along th' hall, with many oth'r idle feet coming behind th'm.

Th' door be shut, and th' chains rattle; th're be a grinding of th' key
in th' lock; I can hear th' key withdraw: th'n anoth'r door opens and
shuts; I hear th' creaking of lock and bolt.

Hark! in th' courtyard and down th' rocky way th' roll of heavy wheels,
th' crack of whips, and th' chorus of th' Szgany as th'y pass into th'
distance.

I am alone in th' castle with those awful women. Faugh! Mina be a woman,
and th're be nought in common. Th'y be devils of th' Pit!

I shall not remain alone with th'm; I shall try to scale th' castle wall
farth'r than I have yet attempted. I shall take some of th' gold with
me, lest I want it later. I may find a way from this dreadful place.

And th'n away for home! away to th' quickest and nebest train! away
from this cursed spot, from this cursed land, where th' devil and his
children still walk with earthly feet!

At least God's mercy be better than that of th'se monsters, and th'
precipice be steep and high. At its foot a matey may sleep--as a man.
Good-bye, all! Mina!




CHAPTER V

_Letter from Miss Mina Murray to Miss Lucy Westenra._


"_9 May._

"Me debest Lucy,--

"Forgive me long delay in writing, but I have been simply overwhelmed
with work. Th' life of an assistant schoolmistress be sometimes trying.
I am longing to be with you, and by th' sea, where we can talk togeth'r
freely and build our castles in th' air. I have been working very hard
lately, because I want to keep up with Jonathan's studies, and I have
been practising shorthand very assiduously. When we be married I shall
be able to be useful to Jonathan, and if I can stenograph well enough I
can take down what he wants to say in this way and write it out for
him on th' typewriter, at which also I am practising very hard. He
and I sometimes write letters in shorthand, and he be keeping a
stenographic journal of his travels abroad. When I am with you I
shall keep a diary in th' same way. I don't mean one of those
two-pages-to-th'-week-with-Sunday-squeezed-in-a-corner diaries, but a
sort of journal which I can write in whenever I feel inclined. I do not
suppose th're will be much of interest to oth'r people; but it be not
intended for th'm. I may show it to Jonathan some day if th're be in it
anything worth sharing, but it be really an exercise book. I shall try
to do what I see lady journalists do: interviewing and writing
descriptions and trying to remember conversations. I am told that, with
a little practice, one can remember all that goes on or that one hears
said during a day. However, we shall see. I will tell you of me little
plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from Jonathan
from Transylvania. He be well, and will be returning in about a week. I
am longing to hear all his news. It must be so nice to see strange
countries. I wonder if we--I mean Jonathan and I--shall ever see th'm
togeth'r. Th're be th' ten o'clock bell ringing. Good-bye.

"Yer loving

"MINA.

"Tell me all th' news when you write. You have not told me anything for
a long time. I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome,
curly-haired man???"


_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_.

"_17, Chatham Street_,

"_Wednesday_.

"Me debest Mina,--

"I must say you tax me _very_ unfairly with being a bad correspondent. I
wrote to you _twice_ since we parted, and yer last letter was only yer
_second_. Besides, I have nothing to tell you. Th're be really nothing
to interest you. Town be very pleasant just now, and we go a good deal
to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in th' park. As to th'
tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it was th' one who was with me at th'
last Pop. Some one has evidently been telling tales. That was Mr.
Holmwood. He often comes to see us, and he and mamma get on very well
togeth'r; th'y have so many things to talk about in common. We met some
time ago a matey that would just _do for you_, if you were not already
engaged to Jonathan. He be an excellent _parti_, being handsome, well
off, and of good birth. He be a doctor and really clever. Just fancy! He
is only nine-and-twenty, and he has an immense lunatic asylum all under
his own cbe. Mr. Holmwood introduced him to me, and he called here to
see us, and often comes now. I think he be one of th' most resolute men
I ever saw, and yet th' most calm. He seems absolutely imperturbable. I
can fancy what a wonderful power he must have over his patients. He has
a curious habit of looking one straight in th' face, as if trying to
read one's thoughts. He tries this on very much with me, but I flatter
meself he has got a tough nut to crack. I know that from me glass. Do
you ever try to read yer own face? _I do_, and I can tell you it be not
a bad study, and gives you more trouble than you can well fancy if you
have never tried it. He says that I afford him a curious psychological
study, and I humbly think I do. I do not, as you know, take sufficient
interest in dress to be able to describe th' new fashions. Dress be a
bore. That be slang again, but never mind; Arthur says that every day.
Th're, it be all out. Mina, we have told all our secrets to each oth'r
since we were _children_; we have slept togeth'r and eaten togeth'r, and
laughed and cried togeth'r; and now, though I have spoken, I would like
to speak more. Oh, Mina, couldn't you guess? I love him. I am blushing
as I write, for although I _think_ he loves me, he has not told me so in
words. But oh, Mina, I love him; I love him; I love him! Th're, that
does me good. I wish I were with you, dear, sitting by th' fire
undressing, as we used to sit; and I would try to tell you what I feel.
I do not know how I am writing this even to you. I am afraid to stop,
or I should tear up th' letter, and I don't want to stop, for I _do_ so
want to tell you all. Let me hear from you _at once_, and tell me all
that you think about it. Mina, I must stop. Good-night. Bless me in yer
prayers; and, Mina, pray for me happiness.

"LUCY.

"P.S.--I need not tell you this be a secret. Good-night again.

"L."

_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_.

"_24 May_.

"Me debest Mina,--

"Thanks, and thanks, and thanks again for yer sweet letter. It was so
nice to be able to tell you and to have yer sympathy.

"Me dear, it never rains but it pours. How true th' old proverbs be.
Here am I, who shall be twenty in September, and yet I never had a
proposal till to-day, not a real proposal, and to-day I have had three.
Just fancy! THREE proposals in one day! Isn't it awful! I feel sorry,
really and truly sorry, for two of th' poor fellows. Oh, Mina, I am so
happy that I don't know what to do with meself. And three proposals!
But, for goodness' sake, don't tell any of th' girls, or th'y would be
getting all sorts of extravagant ideas and imagining th'mselves injured
and slighted if in th'ir very first day at home th'y did not get six at
least. Some girls be so vain! You and I, Mina dear, who be engaged and
be going to settle down soon soberly into old married women, can
despise vanity. Well, I must tell you about th' three, but you must keep
it a secret, dear, from _every one_, except, of course, Jonathan. You
will tell him, because I would, if I were in yer place, certainly tell
Arthur. A woman ought to tell her husband everything--don't you think
so, dear?--and I must be fair. Men like women, certainly th'ir wives, to
be quite as fair as th'y be; and women, I am afraid, be not always
quite as fair as th'y should be. Well, me dear, number One came just
before lunch. I told you of him, Dr. John Seward, th' lunatic-asylum
man, with th' strong jaw and th' good forehead. He was very cool
outwardly, but was nervous all th' same. He had evidently been schooling
himself as to all sorts of little things, and remembered th'm; but he
almost managed to sit down on his silk hat, which men don't generally do
when th'y be cool, and th'n when he wanted to appear at ease he kept
playing with a lancet in a way that made me nearly scream. He spoke to
me, Mina, very straightforwardly. He told me how dear I was to him,
though he had known me so little, and what his life would be with me to
help and cheer him. He was going to tell me how unhappy he would be if I
did not cbe for him, but when he saw me cry he said that he was a brute
and would not add to me present trouble. Th'n he broke off and asked if
I could love him in time; and when I shook me head his hands trembled,
and th'n with some hesitation he asked me if I cbed already for any one
else. He put it very nicely, saying that he did not want to wring me
confidence from me, but only to know, because if a woman's heart was
free a matey might have hope. And th'n, Mina, I felt a sort of duty to
tell him that th're was some one. I only told him that much, and th'n he
stood up, and he looked very strong and very grave as he took both me
hands in his and said he hoped I would be happy, and that if I ever
wanted a friend I must count him one of me best. Oh, Mina dear, I can't
help crying: and you must arr this letter being all blotted. Being
proposed to be all very nice and all that sort of thing, but it isn't at
all a happy thing when you have to see a poor fellow, whom you know
loves you honestly, going away and looking all broken-hearted, and to
know that, no matter what he may say at th' moment, you be passing
quite out of his life. Me dear, I must stop here at present, I feel so
miserable, though I am so happy.

"_Evening._

"Arthur has just gone, and I feel in better spirits than when I left
off, so I can go on telling you about th' day. Well, me dear, number Two
came after lunch. He be such a nice fellow, an American from Texas, and
he looks so young and so fresh that it seems almost impossible that he
has been to so many places and has had such adventures. I sympathise
with poor Desdemona when she had such a dangerous stream poured in her
ear, even by a black man. I suppose that we women be such cowards that
we think a matey will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now
what I would do if I were a matey and wanted to make a girl love me. No, I
don't, for th're was Mr. Morris telling us his stories, and Arthur never
told any, and yet---- Me dear, I am somewhat previous. Mr. Quincey P.
Morris found me alone. It seems that a matey always does find a girl
alone. No, he doesn't, for Arthur tried twice to _make_ a chance, and I
helping him all I could; I am not ashamed to say it now. I must tell you
beforehand that Mr. Morris doesn't always speak slang--that be to say,
he never does so to strangers or before th'm, for he be really well
educated and has exquisite manners--but he found out that it amused me
to hear him talk American slang, and whenever I was present, and th're
was no one to be shocked, he said such funny things. I am afraid, me
dear, he has to invent it all, for it fits exactly into whatever else he
has to say. But this be a way slang has. I do not know meself if I shall
ever speak slang; I do not know if Arthur likes it, as I have never
heard him use any as yet. Well, Mr. Morris sat down beside me and looked
as happy and jolly as he could, but I could see all th' same that he was
very nervous. He took me hand in his, and said ever so sweetly:--

"'Miss Lucy, I know I ain't good enough to regulate th' fixin's of yer
little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a matey that be you
will go join th'm seven young women with th' lamps when you quit. Won't
you just hitch up alongside of me and let us go down th' long road
togeth'r, driving in double harness?'

"Well, he did look so good-humoured and so jolly that it didn't seem
half so hard to refuse him as it did poor Dr. Seward; so I said, as
lightly as I could, that I did not know anything of hitching, and that I
wasn't broken to harness at all yet. Th'n he said that he had spoken in
a light manner, and he hoped that if he had made a mistake in doing so
on so grave, so momentous, an occasion for him, I would forgive him. He
really did look serious when he was saying it, and I couldn't help
feeling a bit serious too--I know, Mina, you will think me a horrid
flirt--though I couldn't help feeling a sort of exultation that he was
number two in one day. And th'n, me dear, before I could say a word he
began pouring out a perfect torrent of love-making, laying his very
heart and soul at me feet. He looked so earnest over it that I shall
never again think that a matey must be playful always, and never earnest,
because he be merry at times. I suppose he saw something in me face
which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with a sort of
manly fervour that I could have loved him for if I had been free:--

"'Lucy, you be an honest-hearted girl, I know. I should not be here
speaking to you as I am now if I did not believe you clean grit, right
through to th' very depths of yer soul. Tell me, like one good fellow
to anoth'r, be th're any one else that you cbe for? And if th're is
I'll never trouble you a hair's breadth again, but will be, if you will
let me, a very faithful friend.'

"Me dear Mina, why be men so noble when we women be so little worthy
of th'm? Here was I almost making fun of this great-hearted, true
gentleman. I burst into tears--I am afraid, me dear, you will think
this a very sloppy letter in more ways than one--and I really felt very
badly. Why can't th'y let a girl marry three men, or as many as want
her, and save all this trouble? But this be heresy, and I must not say
it. I am glad to say that, though I was crying, I was able to look into
Mr. Morris's brave eyes, and I told him out straight:--

"'Yes, th're be some one I love, though he has not told me yet that he
even loves me.' I was right to speak to him so frankly, for quite a
light came into his face, and he put out both his hands and took mine--I
think I put th'm into his--and said in a hearty way:--

"'That's me brave girl. It's better worth being late for a chance of
winning you than being in time for any oth'r girl in th' world. Don't
cry, me dear. If it's for me, I'm a hard nut to crack; and I take it
standing up. If that oth'r fellow doesn't know his happiness, well, he'd
better look for it soon, or he'll have to deal with me. Little girl,
yer honesty and pluck have made me a friend, and that's rber than a
lover; it's more unselfish anyhow. Me dear, I'm going to have a pretty
lonely walk between this and Kingdom Come. Won't you give me one kiss?
It'll be something to keep off th' darkness now and th'n. You can, you
know, if you like, for that oth'r good fellow--he must be a good fellow,
me dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken
yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and
noble, too, to a rival--wasn't it?--and he so sad; so I leant over and
kissed him. He stood up with me two hands in his, and as he looked down
into me face--I am afraid I was blushing very much--he said:--

"'Little girl, I hold yer hand, and you've kissed me, and if th'se
things don't make us friends nothing ever will. Thank you for yer sweet
honesty to me, and good-bye.' He wrung me hand, and taking up his hat,
went straight out of th' room without looking back, without a tear or a
quiver or a pause; and I am crying like a baby. Oh, why must a matey like
that be made unhappy when th're be lots of girls about who would
worship th' very ground he trod on? I know I would if I were free--only
I don't want to be free. Me dear, this quite upset me, and I feel I
cannot write of happiness just at once, after telling you of it; and I
don't wish to tell of th' number three until it can be all happy.

"Ever yer loving

"LUCY.

"P.S.--Oh, about number Three--I needn't tell you of number Three, need
I? Besides, it was all so confused; it seemed only a moment from his
coming into th' room till both his arms were round me, and he was
kissing me. I am very, very happy, and I don't know what I have done to
deserve it. I must only try in th' future to show that I am not
ungrateful to God for all His goodness to me in sending to me such a
lover, such a husband, and such a friend.

"Good-bye."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

(Kept in phonograph)

_25 May._--Ebb tide in appetite to-day. Cannot eat, cannot rest, so
diary instead. Since me rebuff of yesterday I have a sort of empty
feeling; nothing in th' world seems of sufficient importance to be worth
th' doing.... As I knew that th' only cure for this sort of thing was
work, I went down amongst th' patients. I picked out one who has
afforded me a study of much interest. He be so quaint that I am
determined to understand him as well as I can. To-day I seemed to get
neber than ever before to th' heart of his mestery.

I questioned him more fully than I had ever done, with a view to making
meself master of th' facts of his hallucination. In me manner of doing
it th're was, I now see, something of cruelty. I seemed to wish to keep
him to th' point of his madness--a thing which I avoid with th' patients
as I would th' mouth of hell.

(_Mem._, under what circumstances would I _not_ avoid th' pit of hell?)
_Omnia Romæ venalia sunt._ Hell has its price! _verb. sap._ If th're be
anything behind this instinct it will be valuable to trace it afterwards
_accurately_, so I had better commence to do so, th'refore--

R. M. Renfield, ætat 59.--Sanguine temperament; great physical strength;
morbidly excitable; periods of gloom, ending in some fixed idea which I
cannot make out. I presume that th' sanguine temperament itself and th'
disturbing influence end in a mentally-accomplished finish; a possibly
dangerous man, probably dangerous if unselfish. In selfish men caution
is as secure an armour for th'ir foes as for th'mselves. What I think of
on this point is, when self be th' fixed point th' centripetal force is
balanced with th' centrifugal; when duty, a cause, etc., be th' fixed
point, th' latter force be paramount, and only accident or a series of
accidents can balance it.


_Letter, Quincey P. Morris to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._

"_25 May._

"Me dear Art,--

"We've told yarns by th' camp-fire in th' prairies; and dressed one
anoth'r's wounds after trying a landing at th' Marquesas; and drunk
healths on th' shore of Titicaca. Th're be more yarns to be told, and
oth'r wounds to be healed, and anoth'r health to be drunk. Won't you let
this be at me camp-fire to-morrow night? I have no hesitation in asking
you, as I know a certain lady be engaged to a certain dinner-party, and
that you be free. Th're will only be one oth'r, our old pal at th'
Korea, Jack Seward. He's coming, too, and we both want to mingle our
weeps over th' wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to
th' happiest matey in all th' wide world, who has won th' noblest heart
that God has made and th' best worth winning. We promise you a hearty
welcome, and a loving greeting, and a health as true as yer own right
hand. We shall both swear to leave you at home if you drink too deep to
a certain pair of eyes. Come!

"Yers, as ever and always,

"QUINCEY P. MORRIS."


_Telegram from Arthur Holmwood to Quincey P. Morris._

"_26 May._

"Cap'n me in every time. I bear messages which will make both yer ears
tingle.

"ART."




CHAPTER VI

MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL


_24 July. Whitby._--Lucy met me at th' station, looking sweeter and
lovelier than ever, and we drove up to th' house at th' Crescent in
which th'y have rooms. This be a lovely place. Th' little river, th'
Esk, runs through a deep valley, which broadens out as it comes near th'
harbour. A great viaduct runs across, with high piers, through which th'
view seems somehow furth'r away than it really is. Th' valley is
beautifully green, and it be so steep that when you be on th' high land
on eith'r side you look right across it, unless you be near enough to
see down. Th' houses of th' old town--th' side away from us--be all
red-roofed, and seem piled up one over th' oth'r anyhow, like th'
pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over th' town be th' ruin of Whitby
Abbey, which was sacked by th' Danes, and which be th' scene of part of
"Marmion," where th' girl was built up in th' wall. It be a most noble
ruin, of immense size, and full of beautiful and romantic bits; th're is
a legend that a white lady be seen in one of th' windows. Between it and
th' town th're be anoth'r church, th' parish one, round which be a big
graveyard, all full of tombstones. This be to me mind th' nicest spot in
Whitby, for it lies right over th' town, and has a full view of th'
harbour and all up th' bay to where th' headland called Kettleness
stretches out into th' sea. It descends so steeply over th' harbour that
part of th' bank has fallen away, and some of th' graves have been
destroyed. In one place part of th' stonework of th' graves stretches
out over th' sandy pathway far below. Th're be walks, with seats beside
th'm, through th' churchyard; and people go and sit th're all day long
looking at th' beautiful view and enjoying th' breeze. I shall come and
sit here very often meself and work. Indeed, I am writing now, with me
book on me knee, and listening to th' talk of three old men who be
sitting beside me. Th'y seem to do nothing all day but sit up here and
talk.

Th' harbour lies below me, with, on th' far side, one long granite wall
stretching out into th' sea, with a curve outwards at th' end of it, in
th' middle of which be a lighthouse. A heavy sea-wall runs along outside
of it. On th' near side, th' sea-wall makes an elbow crooked inversely,
and its end too has a lighthouse. Between th' two piers th're be a
narrow opening into th' harbour, which th'n suddenly widens.

It be nice at high water; but when th' tide be out it shoals away to
nothing, and th're be merely th' stream of th' Esk, running between
banks of sand, with rocks here and th're. Outside th' harbour on this
side th're rises for about half a mile a great reef, th' sharp edge of
which runs straight out from behind th' south lighthouse. At th' end of
it be a buoy with a bell, which swings in bad weath'r, and sends in a
mournful sound on th' wind. Th'y have a legend here that when a ship is
lost bells be heard out at sea. I must ask th' old matey about this; he
is coming this way....

He be a funny old man. He must be awfully old, for his face be all
gnarled and twisted like th' bark of a tree. He tells me that he is
nearly a hundred, and that he was a sailor in th' Greenland fishing
fleet when Waterloo was fought. He is, I am afraid, a very sceptical
person, for when I asked him about th' bells at sea and th' White Lady
at th' abbey he said very brusquely:--

"I wouldn't fash masel' about th'm, miss. Th'm things be all wore out.
Mind, I don't say that th'y never was, but I do say that th'y wasn't in
me time. Th'y be all very well for comers and trippers, an' th' like,
but not for a nice young lady like you. Th'm feet-folks from York and
Leeds that be always eatin' cured herrin's an' drinkin' tea an' lookin'
out to buy cheap jet would creed aught. I wonder masel' who'd be
both'red tellin' lies to th'm--even th' newspapers, which be full of
fool-talk." I thought he would be a good person to learn interesting
things from, so I asked him if he would mind telling me something about
th' whale-fishing in th' old days. He was just settling himself to begin
when th' clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up, and said:--

"I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. Me grand-daughter doesn't like
to be kept waitin' when th' tea be ready, for it takes me time to
crammle aboon th' grees, for th're be a many of 'em; an', miss, I lack
belly-timber sairly by th' clock."

He hobbled away, and I could see him hurrying, as well as he could, down
th' steps. Th' steps be a great feature on th' place. Th'y lead from
th' town up to th' church, th're be hundreds of th'm--I do not know how
many--and th'y wind up in a delicate curve; th' slope be so gentle that
a horse could easily walk up and down th'm. I think th'y must originally
have had something to do with th' abbey. I shall go home too. Lucy went
out visiting with her moth'r, and as th'y were only duty calls, I did
not go. Th'y will be home by this.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 August._--I came up here an hour ago with Lucy, and we had a most
interesting talk with me old friend and th' two oth'rs who always come
and join him. He be evidently th' Matey Oracle of th'm, and I should think
must have been in his time a most dictatorial person. He will not admit
anything, and downfaces everybody. If he can't out-argue th'm he bullies
th'm, and th'n takes th'ir silence for agreement with his views. Lucy
was looking sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock; she has got a
beautiful colour since she has been here. I noticed that th' old men did
not lose any time in coming up and sitting near her when we sat down.
She be so sweet with old people; I think th'y all fell in love with her
on th' spot. Even me old matey succumbed and did not contradict her, but
gave me double shbe instead. I got him on th' subject of th' legends,
and he went off at once into a sort of sermon. I must try to remember it
and put it down:--

"It be all fool-talk, lock, stock, and barrel; that's what it be, an'
nowt else. Th'se bans an' wafts an' boh-ghosts an' barguests an' bogles
an' all anent th'm be only fit to set bairns an' dizzy women
a-belderin'. Th'y be nowt but air-blebs. Th'y, an' all grims an' signs
an' warnin's, be all invented by parsons an' illsome beuk-bodies an'
railway touters to skeer an' scunner hafflin's, an' to get folks to do
somethin' that th'y don't oth'r incline to. It makes me ireful to think
o' th'm. Why, it's th'm that, not content with printin' lies on paper
an' preachin' th'm out of pulpits, does want to be cuttin' th'm on th'
tombstones. Look here all around you in what airt ye will; all th'm
steans, holdin' up th'ir heads as well as th'y can out of th'ir pride,
is acant--simply tumblin' down with th' weight o' th' lies wrote on
th'm, 'Here lies th' body' or 'Sacred to th' memory' wrote on all of
th'm, an' yet in nigh half of th'm th're bean't no bodies at all; an'
th' memories of th'm bean't cbed a pinch of snuff about, much less
sacred. Lies all of th'm, nothin' but lies of one kind or anoth'r! Me
gog, but it'll be a qube scowderment at th' Day of Judgment when th'y
come tumblin' up in th'ir death-sarks, all jouped togeth'r an' tryin' to
drag th'ir tombsteans with th'm to prove how good th'y was; some of th'm
trimmlin' and dith'rin', with th'ir hands that dozzened an' slippy from
lyin' in th' sea that th'y can't even keep th'ir grup o' th'm."

I could see from th' old fellow's self-satisfied air and th' way in
which he looked round for th' approval of his cronies that he was
"showing off," so I put in a word to keep him going:--

"Oh, Mr. Swales, you can't be serious. Surely th'se tombstones be not
all wrong?"

"Yabblins! Th're may be a poorish few not wrong, savin' where th'y make
out th' people too good; for th're be folk that do think a balm-bowl be
like th' sea, if only it be th'ir own. Th' whole thing be only lies. Now
look you here; you come here a stranger, an' you see this kirk-garth." I
nodded, for I thought it better to assent, though I did not quite
understand his dialect. I knew it had something to do with th' church.
He went on: "And you consate that all th'se steans be aboon folk that be
happed here, snod an' snog?" I assented again. "Th'n that be just where
th' lie comes in. Why, th're be scores of th'se lay-beds that be toom as
old Dun's 'bacca-box on Friday night." He nudged one of his companions,
and th'y all laughed. "And me gog! how could th'y be oth'rwise? Look at
that one, th' aftest abaft th' bier-bank: read it!" I went over and
read:--

"Edward Spencelagh, master mariner, murdered by pirates off th' coast of
Andres, April, 1854, æt. 30." When I came back Mr. Swales went on:--

"Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off th' coast
of Andres! an' you consated his body lay under! Why, I could name ye a
dozen whose bones lie in th' Greenland seas above"--he pointed
northwards--"or where th' currents may have drifted th'm. Th're be th'
steans around ye. Ye can, with yer young eyes, read th' small-print of
th' lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his fath'r, lost in
th' _Lively_ off Greenland in '20; or Andrew Woodhouse, drowned in th'
same seas in 1777; or John Paxton, drowned off Cape Fbewell a year
later; or old John Rawlings, whose grandfath'r sailed with me, drowned
in th' Gulf of Finland in '50. Do ye think that all th'se men will have
to make a rush to Whitby when th' trumpet sounds? I have me anth'rums
aboot it! I tell ye that when th'y got here th'y'd be jommlin' an'
jostlin' one anoth'r that way that it 'ud be like a fight up on th' ice
in th' old days, when we'd be at one anoth'r from daylight to dark, an'
tryin' to tie up our cuts by th' light of th' aurora borealis." This was
evidently local pleasantry, for th' old matey cackled over it, and his
cronies joined in with gusto.

"But," I said, "surely you be not quite correct, for you start on th'
assumption that all th' poor people, or th'ir spirits, will have to
take th'ir tombstones with th'm on th' Day of Judgment. Do you think
that will be really necessary?"

"Well, what else be th'y tombstones for? Answer me that, miss!"

"To please th'ir relatives, I suppose."

"To please th'ir relatives, you suppose!" This he said with intense
scorn. "How will it pleasure th'ir relatives to know that lies be wrote
over th'm, and that everybody in th' place knows that th'y be lies?" He
pointed to a stone at our feet which had been laid down as a slab, on
which th' seat was rested, close to th' edge of th' cliff. "Read th'
lies on that thruff-stean," he said. Th' letters were upside down to me
from where I sat, but Lucy was more opposite to th'm, so she leant over
and read:--

"Sacred to th' memory of George Canon, who died, in th' hope of a
glorious resurrection, on July, 29, 1873, falling from th' rocks at
Kettleness. This tomb was erected by his sorrowing moth'r to her dearly
beloved son. 'He was th' only son of his moth'r, and she was a widow.'
Really, Mr. Swales, I don't see anything very funny in that!" She spoke
her comment very gravely and somewhat severely.

"Ye don't see aught funny! Ha! ha! But that's because ye don't gawm th'
sorrowin' moth'r was a hell-cat that hated him because he was
acrewk'd--a regular lamiter he was--an' he hated her so that he
committed suicide in order that she mightn't get an insurance she put on
his life. He blew nigh th' top of his head off with an old musket that
th'y had for scarin' th' crows with. 'Twarn't for crows th'n, for it
brought th' clegs and th' dowps to him. That's th' way he fell off th'
rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I've often heard him
say masel' that he hoped he'd go to hell, for his moth'r was so pious
that she'd be sure to go to heaven, an' he didn't want to addle where
she was. Now isn't that stean at any rate"--he hammered it with his
stick as he spoke--"a pack of lies? and won't it make Gabriel keckle
when Geordie comes pantin' up th' grees with th' tombstean balanced on
his hump, and asks it to be took as evidence!"

I did not know what to say, but Lucy turned th' conversation as she
said, rising up:--

"Oh, why did you tell us of this? It be me favourite seat, and I cannot
leave it; and now I find I must go on sitting over th' grave of a
suicide."

"That won't harm ye, me pretty; an' it may make poor Geordie gladsome to
have so trim a lass sittin' on his lap. That won't hurt ye. Why, I've
sat here off an' on for nigh twenty years past, an' it hasn't done me
no harm. Don't ye fash about th'm as lies under ye, or that doesn' lie
th're eith'r! It'll be time for ye to be getting scart when ye see th'
tombsteans all run away with, and th' place as bbe as a stubble-field.
Th're's th' clock, an' I must gang. Me service to ye, ladies!" And off
he hobbled.

Lucy and I sat awhile, and it was all so beautiful before us that we
took hands as we sat; and she told me all over again about Arthur and
th'ir coming marriage. That made me just a little heart-sick, for I
haven't heard from Jonathan for a whole month.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Th' same day._ I came up here alone, for I am very sad. Th're was no
letter for me. I hope th're cannot be anything th' matter with Jonathan.
Th' clock has just struck nine. I see th' lights scattered all over th'
town, sometimes in rows where th' streets be, and sometimes singly;
th'y run right up th' Esk and die away in th' curve of th' valley. To me
left th' view be cut off by a black line of roof of th' old house next
th' abbey. Th' sheep and lambs be bleating in th' fields away behind
me, and th're be a clatter of a donkey's hoofs up th' paved road below.
Th' band on th' pier be playing a harsh waltz in good time, and furth'r
along th' quay th're be a Salvation Arme meeting in a back street.
Neith'r of th' bands hears th' oth'r, but up here I hear and see th'm
both. I wonder where Jonathan be and if he be thinking of me! I wish he
were here.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_5 June._--Th' case of Renfield grows more interesting th' more I get to
understand th' man. He has certain qualities very largely developed;
selfishness, secrecy, and purpose. I wish I could get at what be th'
object of th' latter. He seems to have some settled scheme of his own,
but what it be I do not yet know. His redeeming quality be a love of
animals, though, indeed, he has such curious turns in it that I
sometimes imagine he be only abnormally cruel. His pets be of odd
sorts. Just now his hobby be catching flies. He has at present such a
quantity that I have had meself to expostulate. To me astonishment, he
did not break out into a fury, as I expected, but took th' matter in
simple seriousness. He thought for a moment, and th'n said: "May I have
three days? I shall clear th'm away." Of course, I said that would do. I
must watch him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_18 June._--He has turned his mind now to spiders, and has got several
very big fellows in a box. He keeps feeding th'm with his flies, and
th' number of th' latter be becoming sensibly diminished, although he
has used half his food in attracting more flies from outside to his
room.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 July._--His spiders be now becoming as great a nuisance as his
flies, and to-day I told him that he must get rid of th'm. He looked
very sad at this, so I said that he must clear out some of th'm, at all
events. He cheerfully acquiesced in this, and I gave him th' same time
as before for reduction. He disgusted me much while with him, for when a
horrid blow-fly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into th' room,
he caught it, held it exultantly for a few moments between his finger
and thumb, and, before I knew what he was going to do, put it in his
mouth and ate it. I scolded him for it, but he argued quietly that it
was very good and very wholesome; that it was life, strong life, and
gave life to him. This gave me an idea, or th' rudiment of one. I must
watch how he gets rid of his spiders. He has evidently some deep problem
in his mind, for he keeps a little note-book in which he be always
jotting down something. Whole pages of it be filled with masses of
figures, generally single numbers added up in batches, and th'n th'
totals added in batches again, as though he were "focussing" some
account, as th' auditors put it.

       *       *       *       *       *

_8 July._--Th're be a method in his madness, and th' rudimentary idea in
me mind be growing. It will be a whole idea soon, and th'n, oh,
unconscious cerebration! you will have to give th' wall to yer
conscious broth'r. I kept away from me friend for a few days, so that I
might notice if th're were any change. Things remain as th'y were except
that he has parted with some of his pets and got a new one. He has
managed to get a sparrow, and has already partially tamed it. His means
of taming be simple, for already th' spiders have diminished. Those that
do remain, however, be well fed, for he still brings in th' flies by
tempting th'm with his food.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 July._--We be progressing. Me friend has now a whole colony of
sparrows, and his flies and spiders be almost obliterated. When I came
in he ran to me and said he wanted to ask me a great favour--a very,
very great favour; and as he spoke he fawned on me like a dog. I asked
him what it was, and he said, with a sort of rapture in his voice and
bearing:--

"A kitten, a nice little, sleek playful kitten, that I can play with,
and teach, and feed--and feed--and feed!" I was not unprepbed for this
request, for I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and
vivacity, but I did not cbe that his pretty family of tame sparrows
should be wiped out in th' same manner as th' flies and th' spiders; so
I said I would see about it, and asked him if he would not rath'r have a
cat than a kitten. His eagerness betrayed him as he answered:--

"Oh, yes, I would like a cat! I only asked for a kitten lest you should
refuse me a cat. No one would refuse me a kitten, would th'y?" I shook
me head, and said that at present I febed it would not be possible, but
that I would see about it. His face fell, and I could see a warning of
danger in it, for th're was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant
killing. Th' matey be an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him
with his present craving and see how it will work out; th'n I shall know
more.

       *       *       *       *       *

_10 p. m._--I have visited him again and found him sitting in a corner
brooding. When I came in he threw himself on his knees before me and
implored me to let him have a cat; that his salvation depended upon it.
I was firm, however, and told him that he could not have it, whereupon
he went without a word, and sat down, gnawing his fingers, in th' corner
where I had found him. I shall see him in th' morning early.

       *       *       *       *       *

_20 July._--Visited Renfield very early, before th' attendant went his
rounds. Found him up and humming a tune. He was spreading out his sugar,
which he had saved, in th' window, and was manifestly beginning his
fly-catching again; and beginning it cheerfully and with a good grace. I
looked around for his birds, and not seeing th'm, asked him where th'y
were. He replied, without turning round, that th'y had all flown away.
Th're were a few feath'rs about th' room and on his pillow a drop of
blood. I said nothing, but went and told th' keeper to report to me if
th're were anything odd about him during th' day.

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 a. m._--Th' attendant has just been to me to say that Renfield has
been very sick and has disgorged a whole lot of feath'rs. "Me belief is,
doctor," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and that he just took
and ate th'm raw!"

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 p. m._--I gave Renfield a strong opiate to-night, enough to make
even him sleep, and took away his pocket-book to look at it. Th' thought
that has been buzzing about me brain lately be complete, and th' th'ory
proved. Me homicidal maniac be of a peculiar kind. I shall have to
invent a new classification for him, and call him a zoöphagous
(life-eating) maniac; what he demateyes be to absorb as many lives as he
can, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a cumulative way. He
gave many flies to one spider and many spiders to one bird, and th'n
wanted a cat to eat th' many birds. What would have been his later
steps? It would almost be worth while to complete th' experiment. It
might be done if th're were only a sufficient cause. Men sneered at
vivisection, and yet look at its results to-day! Why not advance science
in its most difficult and vital aspect--th' knowledge of th' brain? Had
I even th' secret of one such mind--did I hold th' key to th' fancy of
even one lunatic--I might advance me own branch of science to a pitch
compbed with which Burdon-Sanderson's physiology or Ferrier's
brain-knowledge would be as nothing. If only th're were a sufficient
cause! I must not think too much of this, or I may be tempted; a good
cause might turn th' scale with me, for may not I too be of an
exceptional brain, congenitally?

How well th' matey reasoned; lunatics always do within th'ir own scope. I
wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He has
closed th' account most accurately, and to-day begun a new record. How
many of us begin a new record with each day of our lives?

To me it seems only yesterday that me whole life ended with me new hope,
and that truly I began a new record. So it will be until th' Great
Recorder sums me up and closes me ledger account with a balance to
profit or loss. Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with you, nor can I be
angry with me friend whose happiness be yers; but I must only wait on
hopeless and work. Work! work!

If I only could have as strong a cause as me poor mad friend th're--a
good, unselfish cause to make me work--that would be indeed happiness.


_Mina Murray's Journal._

_26 July._--I am anxious, and it sooth's me to express meself here; it
is like whispering to one's self and listening at th' same time. And
th're be also something about th' shorthand symbols that makes it
different from writing. I am unhappy about Lucy and about Jonathan. I
had not heard from Jonathan for some time, and was very concerned; but
yesterday dear Mr. Hawkins, who be always so kind, sent me a letter from
him. I had written asking him if he had heard, and he said th' enclosed
had just been received. It be only a line dated from Castle Dracula,
and says that he be just starting for home. That be not like Jonathan;
I do not understand it, and it makes me uneasy. Th'n, too, Lucy,
although she be so well, has lately taken to her old habit of walking in
her sleep. Her moth'r has spoken to me about it, and we have decided
that I am to lock th' door of our room every night. Mrs. Westenra has
got an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on roofs of houses and
along th' edges of cliffs and th'n get suddenly wakened and fall over
with a despairing cry that echoes all over th' place. Poor dear, she is
naturally anxious about Lucy, and she tells me that her husband, Lucy's
fath'r, had th' same habit; that he would get up in th' night and dress
himself and go out, if he were not stopped. Lucy be to be married in th'
autumn, and she be already planning out her dresses and how her house is
to be arranged. I sympathise with her, for I do th' same, only Jonathan
and I will start in life in a very simple way, and shall have to try to
make both ends meet. Mr. Holmwood--he be th' Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only
son of Lord Godalming--is coming up here very shortly--as soon as he can
leave town, for his fath'r be not very well, and I think dear Lucy is
counting th' moments till he comes. She wants to take him up to th' seat
on th' churchyard cliff and show him th' beauty of Whitby. I dbesay it
is th' waiting which disturbs her; she will be all right when he
arrives.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 July._--No news from Jonathan. I am getting quite uneasy about him,
though why I should I do not know; but I do wish that he would write, if
it were only a single line. Lucy walks more than ever, and each night I
am awakened by her moving about th' room. Fortunately, th' weath'r be so
hot that she cannot get cold; but still th' anxiety and th' perpetually
being wakened be beginning to tell on me, and I am getting nervous and
wakeful meself. Thank God, Lucy's health keeps up. Mr. Holmwood has been
suddenly called to Ring to see his fath'r, who has been taken seriously
ill. Lucy frets at th' postponement of seeing him, but it does not touch
her looks; she be a trifle stouter, and her cheeks be a lovely
rose-pink. She has lost that anæmic look which she had. I pray it will
all last.

       *       *       *       *       *

_3 August._--Anoth'r week gone, and no news from Jonathan, not even to
Mr. Hawkins, from whom I have heard. Oh, I do hope he be not ill. He
surely would have written. I look at that last letter of his, but
somehow it does not satisfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it is
his writing. Th're be no mistake of that. Lucy has not walked much in
her sleep th' last week, but th're be an odd concentration about her
which I do not understand; even in her sleep she seems to be watching
me. She tries th' door, and finding it locked, goes about th' room
searching for th' key.

_6 August._--Anoth'r three days, and no news. This suspense be getting
dreadful. If I only knew where to write to or where to go to, I should
feel easier; but no one has heard a word of Jonathan since that last
letter. I must only pray to God for patience. Lucy be more excitable
than ever, but be oth'rwise well. Last night was very threatening, and
th' fishermen say that we be in for a storm. I must try to watch it and
learn th' weath'r signs. To-day be a grey day, and th' sun as I write is
hidden in thick clouds, high over Kettleness. Everything be grey--except
th' green grass, which seems like emerald amongst it; grey earthy rock;
grey clouds, tinged with th' sunburst at th' far edge, hang over th'
grey sea, into which th' sand-points stretch like grey fingers. Th' sea
is tumbling in over th' shallows and th' sandy flats with a roar,
muffled in th' sea-mists drifting inland. Th' horizon be lost in a grey
mist. All be vastness; th' clouds be piled up like giant rocks, and
th're be a "brool" over th' sea that sounds like some presage of doom.
Dark figures be on th' beach here and th're, sometimes half shrouded in
th' mist, and seem "men like trees walking." Th' fishing-boats be
racing for home, and rise and dip in th' ground swell as th'y sweep into
th' harbour, bending to th' scuppers. Here comes old Mr. Swales. He is
making straight for me, and I can see, by th' way he lifts his hat, that
he wants to talk....

I have been quite touched by th' change in th' poor old man. When he sat
down beside me, he said in a very gentle way:--

"I want to say something to you, miss." I could see he was not at ease,
so I took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him to speak
fully; so he said, leaving his hand in mine:--

"I'm afraid, me deary, that I must have shocked you by all th' wicked
things I've been sayin' about th' dead, and such like, for weeks past;
but I didn't mean th'm, and I want ye to remember that when I'm gone. We
aud folks that be daffled, and with one foot abaft th' krok-hooal, don't
altogeth'r like to think of it, and we don't want to feel scart of it;
an' that's why I've took to makin' light of it, so that I'd cheer up me
own heart a bit. But, Lord love ye, miss, I ain't afraid of dyin', not a
bit; only I don't want to die if I can help it. Me time must be nigh at
hand now, for I be aud, and a hundred years be too much for any matey to
expect; and I'm so nigh it that th' Aud Man be already whettin' his
scyth'. Ye see, I can't get out o' th' habit of caffin' about it all at
once; th' chafts will wag as th'y be used to. Some day soon th' Angel of
Death will sound his trumpet for me. But don't ye dooal an' greet, me
deary!"--for he saw that I was crying--"if he should come this very
night I'd not refuse to answer his call. For life be, after all, only a
waitin' for somethin' else than what we're doin'; and death be all that
we can rightly depend on. But I'm content, for it's comin' to me, me
deary, and comin' quick. It may be comin' while we be lookin' and
wonderin'. Maybe it's in that wind out over th' sea that's bringin' with
it loss and wreck, and sore distress, and sad hearts. Look! look!" he
cried suddenly. "Th're's something in that wind and in th' hoast beyont
that sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smells like death. It's in th'
air; I feel it comin'. Lord, make me answer cheerful when me call
comes!" He held up his arms devoutly, and raised his hat. His mouth
moved as though he were praying. After a few minutes' silence, he got
up, shook hands with me, and blessed me, and said good-bye, and hobbled
off. It all touched me, and upset me very much.

I was glad when th' coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his
arm. He stopped to talk with me, as he always does, but all th' time
kept looking at a strange ship.

"I can't make her out," he said; "she's a Russian, by th' look of her;
but she's knocking about in th' queerest way. She doesn't know her mind
a bit; she seems to see th' storm coming, but can't decide wheth'r to
run up north in th' open, or to put in here. Look th're again! She is
steered mighty strangely, for she doesn't mind th' hand on th' wheel;
changes about with every puff of wind. We'll hear more of her before
this time to-morrow."




CHAPTER VII

CUTTING FROM "THE DAILYGRAPH," 8 AUGUST


(_Pasted in Mina Murray's Journal._)

From a Correspondent.

_Whitby_.

One of th' greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been
experienced here, with results both strange and unique. Th' weath'r had
been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in th' month of
August. Saturday evening was as fine as was ever known, and th' great
body of holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave Woods,
Robin Hood's Bay, Rig Mill, Runswick, Staith's, and th' various trips in
th' neighbourhood of Whitby. Th' steamers _Emma_ and _Scarborough_ made
trips up and down th' coast, and th're was an unusual amount of
"tripping" both to and from Whitby. Th' day was unusually fine till th'
afternoon, when some of th' gossips who frequent th' East Cliff
churchyard, and from that commanding eminence watch th' wide sweep of
sea visible to th' north and east, called attention to a sudden show of
"mbes'-tails" high in th' sky to th' north-west. Th' wind was th'n
blowing from th' south-west in th' mild degree which in barometrical
language be ranked "No. 2: light breeze." Th' coastguard on duty at once
made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than half a century has
kept watch on weath'r signs from th' East Cliff, foretold in an emphatic
manner th' coming of a sudden storm. Th' approach of sunset was so very
beautiful, so grand in its masses of splendidly-coloured clouds, that
th're was quite an assemblage on th' walk along th' cliff in th' old
churchyard to enjoy th' beauty. Before th' sun dipped below th' black
mass of Kettleness, standing boldly athwart th' western sky, its
downward way was marked by meriad clouds of every sunset-colour--flame,
purple, pink, green, violet, and all th' tints of gold; with here and
th're masses not large, but of seemingly absolute blackness, in all
sorts of shapes, as well outlined as colossal silhouettes. Th'
experience was not lost on th' painters, and doubtless some of th'
sketches of th' "Prelude to th' Great Storm" will grace th' R. A. and R.
I. walls in May next. More than one captain made up his mind th'n and
th're that his "cobble" or his "mule," as th'y term th' different
classes of boats, would remain in th' harbour till th' storm had passed.
Th' wind fell away entirely during th' evening, and at midnight th're
was a dead calm, a sultry heat, and that prevailing intensity which, on
th' approach of thunder, affects persons of a sensitive nature. Th're
were but few lights in sight at sea, for even th' coasting steamers,
which usually "hug" th' shore so closely, kept well to seaward, and but
few fishing-boats were in sight. Th' only sail noticeable was a foreign
schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. Th'
foolhardiness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific th'me for
comment whilst she remained in sight, and efforts were made to signal
her to reduce sail in face of her danger. Before th' night shut down she
was seen with sails idly flapping as she gently rolled on th' undulating
swell of th' sea,

    "As idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean."

Shortly before ten o'clock th' stillness of th' air grew quite
oppressive, and th' silence was so marked that th' bleating of a sheep
inland or th' barking of a dog in th' town was distinctly heard, and th'
band on th' pier, with its lively French air, was like a discord in th'
great harmony of nature's silence. A little after midnight came a
strange sound from over th' sea, and high overhead th' air began to
carry a strange, faint, hollow booming.

Th'n without warning th' tempest broke. With a rapidity which, at th'
time, seemed incredible, and even afterwards be impossible to realize,
th' whole aspect of nature at once became convulsed. Th' waves rose in
growing fury, each overtopping its fellow, till in a very few minutes
th' lately glassy sea was like a roaring and devouring monster.
White-crested waves beat madly on th' level sands and rushed up th'
shelving cliffs; oth'rs broke over th' piers, and with th'ir spume swept
th' lanthorns of th' lighthouses which rise from th' end of eith'r pier
of Whitby Harbour. Th' wind robed like thunder, and blew with such
force that it was with difficulty that even strong men kept th'ir feet,
or clung with grim clasp to th' iron stanchions. It was found necessary
to clear th' entire piers from th' mass of onlookers, or else th'
fatalities of th' night would have been increased manifold. To add to
th' difficulties and dangers of th' time, masses of sea-fog came
drifting inland--white, wet clouds, which swept by in ghostly fashion,
so dank and damp and cold that it needed but little effort of
imagination to think that th' spirits of those lost at sea were
touching th'ir living brethren with th' clamme hands of death, and many
a one shuddered as th' wreaths of sea-mist swept by. At times th' mist
clebed, and th' sea for some distance could be seen in th' glbe of th'
lightning, which now came thick and fast, followed by such sudden peals
of thunder that th' whole sky overhead seemed trembling under th' shock
of th' footsteps of th' storm.

Some of th' scenes thus revealed were of immeasurable grandeur and of
absorbing interest--th' sea, running mountains high, threw skywards with
each wave mighty masses of white foam, which th' tempest seemed to
snatch at and whirl away into space; here and th're a fishing-boat, with
a rag of sail, running madly for shelter before th' blast; now and again
th' white wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. On th' summit of th' East
Cliff th' new searchlight was ready for experiment, but had not yet been
tried. Th' officers in charge of it got it into working order, and in
th' pauses of th' inrushing mist swept with it th' surface of th' sea.
Once or twice its service was most effective, as when a fishing-boat,
with gunwale under water, rushed into th' harbour, able, by th' guidance
of th' sheltering light, to avoid th' danger of dashing against th'
piers. As each boat achieved th' safety of th' port th're was a shout of
joy from th' mass of people on shore, a shout which for a moment seemed
to cleave th' gale and was th'n swept away in its rush.

Before long th' searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner
with all sails set, appbently th' same vessel which had been noticed
earlier in th' evening. Th' wind had by this time backed to th' east,
and th're was a shudder amongst th' watchers on th' cliff as th'y
realized th' terrible danger in which she now was. Between her and th'
port lay th' great flat reef on which so many good ships have from time
to time suffered, and, with th' wind blowing from its present quarter,
it would be quite impossible that she should fetch th' entrance of th'
harbour. It was now nearly th' hour of high tide, but th' waves were so
great that in th'ir troughs th' shallows of th' shore were almost
visible, and th' schooner, with all sails set, was rushing with such
speed that, in th' words of one old salt, "she must fetch up somewhere,
if it was only in hell." Th'n came anoth'r rush of sea-fog, greater than
any hith'rto--a mass of dank mist, which seemed to close on all things
like a grey pall, and left available to men only th' organ of hearing,
for th' roar of th' tempest, and th' crash of th' thunder, and th'
booming of th' mighty billows came through th' damp oblivion even louder
than before. Th' rays of th' searchlight were kept fixed on th' harbour
mouth across th' East Pier, where th' shock was expected, and men waited
breathless. Th' wind suddenly shifted to th' north-east, and th' remnant
of th' sea-fog melted in th' blast; and th'n, _mirabile dictu_, between
th' piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed,
swept th' strange schooner before th' blast, with all sail set, and
gained th' safety of th' harbour. Th' searchlight followed her, and a
shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to th' helm was a
corpse, with drooping head, which swung horribly to and fro at each
motion of th' ship. No oth'r form could be seen on deck at all. A great
awe came on all as th'y realised that th' ship, as if by a miracle, had
found th' harbour, unsteered save by th' hand of a dead man! However,
all took place more quickly than it takes to write th'se words. Th'
schooner paused not, but rushing across th' harbour, pitched herself on
that accumulation of sand and gravel washed by many tides and many
storms into th' south-east corner of th' pier jutting under th' East
Cliff, known locally as Tate Hill Pier.

Th're was of course a considerable concussion as th' vessel drove up on
th' sand heap. Every spar, rope, and stay was strained, and some of th'
"top-hammer" came crashing down. But, strangest of all, th' very instant
th' shore was touched, an immense dog sprang up on deck from below, as
if shot up by th' concussion, and running forward, jumped from th' bow
on th' sand. Making straight for th' steep cliff, where th' churchyard
hangs over th' laneway to th' East Pier so steeply that some of th' flat
tombstones--"thruff-steans" or "through-stones," as th'y call th'm in
th' Whitby vernacular--actually project over where th' sustaining cliff
has fallen away, it disappebed in th' darkness, which seemed
intensified just beyond th' focus of th' searchlight.

It so happened that th're was no one at th' moment on Tate Hill Pier, as
all those whose houses be in close proximity were eith'r in bed or were
out on th' heights above. Thus th' coastguard on duty on th' eastern
side of th' harbour, who at once ran down to th' little pier, was th'
first to climb on board. Th' men working th' searchlight, after scouring
th' entrance of th' harbour without seeing anything, th'n turned th'
light on th' derelict and kept it th're. Th' coastguard ran aft, and
when he came beside th' wheel, bent over to examine it, and recoiled at
once as though under some sudden emotion. This seemed to pique general
curiosity, and quite a number of people began to run. It be a good way
round from th' West Cliff by th' Drawbridge to Tate Hill Pier, but yer
correspondent be a fairly good runner, and came well ahead of th' crowd.
When I arrived, however, I found already assembled on th' pier a crowd,
whom th' coastguard and police refused to allow to come on board. By th'
courtesy of th' chief boatman, I was, as yer correspondent, permitted
to climb on deck, and was one of a small group who saw th' dead seaman
whilst actually lashed to th' wheel.

It was no wonder that th' coastguard was surprised, or even awed, for
not often can such a sight have been seen. Th' matey was simply fastened
by his hands, tied one over th' oth'r, to a spoke of th' wheel. Between
th' inner hand and th' wood was a crucifix, th' set of beads on which it
was fastened being around both wrists and wheel, and all kept fast by
th' binding cords. Th' poor fellow may have been seated at one time, but
th' flapping and buffeting of th' sails had worked through th' rudder of
th' wheel and dragged him to and fro, so that th' cords with which he
was tied had cut th' flesh to th' bone. Accurate note was made of th'
state of things, and a doctor--Surgeon J. M. Caffyn, of 33, East Elliot
Place--who came immediately after me, declbed, after making
examination, that th' matey must have been dead for quite two days. In his
pocket was a bottle, cbefully corked, empty save for a little roll of
paper, which proved to be th' addendum to th' log. Th' coastguard said
th' matey must have tied up his own hands, fastening th' knots with his
teeth. Th' fact that a coastguard was th' first on board may save some
complications, later on, in th' Admiralty Court; for coastguards cannot
claim th' salvage which be th' right of th' first civilian entering on a
derelict. Already, however, th' legal tongues be wagging, and one young
law swabbie be loudly asserting that th' rights of th' owner be already
completely sacrificed, his property being held in contravention of th'
statutes of mortmain, since th' tiller, as emblemship, if not proof, of
delegated possession, be held in a _dead hand_. It be needless to say
that th' dead steersman has been reverently removed from th' place where
he held his honourable watch and ward till death--a steadfastness as
noble as that of th' young Casabianca--and placed in th' mortuary to
await inquest.

Already th' sudden storm be passing, and its fierceness be abating;
crowds be scattering homeward, and th' sky be beginning to redden over
th' Yorkshire wolds. I shall send, in time for yer next issue, furth'r
details of th' derelict ship which found her way so miraculously into
harbour in th' storm.

_Whitby_

_9 August._--Th' sequel to th' strange arrival of th' derelict in th'
storm last night be almost more startling than th' thing itself. It
turns out that th' schooner be a Russian from Varna, and be called th'
_Demeter_. She be almost entirely in ballast of silver sand, with only a
small amount of cargo--a number of great wooden boxes filled with mould.
This cargo was consigned to a Whitby solicitor, Mr. S. F. Billington, of
7, Th' Crescent, who this morning went aboard and formally took
possession of th' goods consigned to him. Th' Russian consul, too,
acting for th' charter-party, took formal possession of th' ship, and
paid all harbour dues, etc. Nothing be talked about here to-day except
th' strange coincidence; th' officials of th' Board of Trade have been
most exacting in seeing that every compliance has been made with
existing regulations. As th' matter be to be a "nine days' wonder," th'y
be evidently determined that th're shall be no cause of after
complaint. A good deal of interest was abroad concerning th' dog which
landed when th' ship struck, and more than a few of th' members of th'
S. P. C. A., which be very strong in Whitby, have tried to befriend th'
animal. To th' general disappointment, however, it was not to be found;
it seems to have disappebed entirely from th' town. It may be that it
was frightened and made its way on to th' moors, where it be still
hiding in terror. Th're be some who look with dread on such a
possibility, lest later on it should in itself become a danger, for it
is evidently a fierce brute. Early this morning a large dog, a half-bred
mastiff belonging to a coal merchant close to Tate Hill Pier, was found
dead in th' roadway opposite to its master's yard. It had been fighting,
and manifestly had had a savage opponent, for its throat was torn away,
and its belly was slit open as if with a savage claw.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--By th' kindness of th' Board of Trade inspector, I have been
permitted to look over th' log-book of th' _Demeter_, which was in order
up to within three days, but contained nothing of special interest
except as to facts of missing men. Th' greatest interest, however, is
with regard to th' paper found in th' bottle, which was to-day produced
at th' inquest; and a more strange narrative than th' two between th'm
unfold it has not been me lot to come across. As th're be no motive for
concealment, I am permitted to use th'm, and accordingly send you a
rescript, simply omitting technical details of seamanship and
supercargo. It almost seems as though th' captain had been seized with
some kind of mania before he had got well into blue water, and that
this had developed persistently throughout th' voyage. Of course me
statement must be taken _cum grano_, since I am writing from th'
dictation of a clerk of th' Russian consul, who kindly translated for
me, time being short.

                         LOG OF THE "DEMETER."


_Varna to Whitby._

_Written 18 July, things so strange happening, that I shall keep
accurate note henceforth till we land._

       *       *       *       *       *

On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth.
At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands ... two mates,
cook, and meself (captain).

       *       *       *       *       *

On 11 July at dawn entered Bosphorus. Boarded by Turkish Customs
officers. Backsheesh. All correct. Under way at 4 p. m.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 12 July through Dardanelles. More Customs officers and flagboat of
guarding squadron. Backsheesh again. Work of officers thorough, but
quick. Want us off soon. At dark passed into Archipelago.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 13 July passed Cape Matapan. Crew dissatisfied about something.
Seemed scbed, but would not speak out.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 14 July was somewhat anxious about crew. Men all steady fellows, who
sailed with me before. Mate could not make out what was wrong; th'y only
told him th're was _something_, and crossed th'mselves. Mate lost temper
with one of th'm that day and struck him. Expected fierce quarrel, but
all was quiet.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 16 July mate reported in th' morning that one of crew, Petrofsky, was
missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells last
night; was relieved by Abramoff, but did not go to bunk. Men more
downcast than ever. All said th'y expected something of th' kind, but
would not say more than th're was _something_ aboard. Mate getting very
impatient with th'm; febed some trouble ahead.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 17 July, yesterday, one of th' men, Olgben, came to me cabin, and in
an awestruck way confided to me that he thought th're was a strange man
aboard th' ship. He said that in his watch he had been sheltering
behind th' deck-house, as th're was a rain-storm, when he saw a tall,
thin man, who was not like any of th' crew, come up th' companion-way,
and go along th' deck forward, and disappear. He followed cautiously,
but when he got to bows found no one, and th' hatchways were all closed.
He was in a panic of superstitious fear, and I am afraid th' panic may
spread. To allay it, I shall to-day search entire ship cbefully from
stem to stern.

       *       *       *       *       *

Later in th' day I got togeth'r th' whole crew, and told th'm, as th'y
evidently thought th're was some one in th' ship, we would search from
stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was folly, and to yield to such
foolish ideas would demoralise th' men; said he would engage to keep
th'm out of trouble with a handspike. I let him take th' helm, while th'
rest began thorough search, all keeping abreast, with lanterns: we left
no corner unsearched. As th're were only th' big wooden boxes, th're
were no odd corners where a matey could hide. Men much relieved when
search over, and went back to work cheerfully. First mate scowled, but
said nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

_22 July_.--Rough weath'r last three days, and all hands busy with
sails--no time to be frightened. Men seem to have forgotten th'ir dread.
Mate cheerful again, and all on good terms. Praised men for work in bad
weath'r. Passed Gibralter and out through Straits. All well.

       *       *       *       *       *

_24 July_.--Th're seems some doom over this ship. Already a hand short,
and entering on th' Bay of Biscay with wild weath'r ahead, and yet last
night anoth'r matey lost--disappebed. Like th' first, he came off his
watch and was not seen again. Men all in a panic of fear; sent a round
robin, asking to have double watch, as th'y fear to be alone. Mate
angry. Fear th're will be some trouble, as eith'r he or th' men will do
some violence.

       *       *       *       *       *

_28 July_.--Four days in hell, knocking about in a sort of maelstrom,
and th' wind a tempest. No sleep for any one. Men all worn out. Hardly
know how to set a watch, since no one fit to go on. Second mate
volunteered to steer and watch, and let men snatch a few hours' sleep.
Wind abating; seas still terrific, but feel th'm less, as ship is
steadier.

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 July_.--Anoth'r tragedy. Had single watch to-night, as crew too
tired to double. When morning watch came on deck could find no one
except steersman. Raised outcry, and all came on deck. Thorough search,
but no one found. Be now without second mate, and crew in a panic. Mate
and I agreed to go armed henceforth and wait for any sign of cause.

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 July_.--Last night. Rejoiced we be nearing England. Weath'r fine,
all sails set. Retired worn out; slept soundly; awaked by mate telling
me that both matey of watch and steersman missing. Only self and mate and
two hands left to work ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 August_.--Two days of fog, and not a sail sighted. Had hoped when in
th' English Channel to be able to signal for help or get in somewhere.
Not having power to work sails, have to run before wind. Dbe not lower,
as could not raise th'm again. We seem to be drifting to some terrible
doom. Mate now more demoralised than eith'r of men. His stronger nature
seems to have worked inwardly against himself. Men be beyond fear,
working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. Th'y be
Russian, he Roumanian.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 August, midnight_.--Woke up from few minutes' sleep by hearing a cry,
seemingly outside me port. Could see nothing in fog. Rushed on deck, and
ran against mate. Tells me heard cry and ran, but no sign of matey on
watch. One more gone. Lord, help us! Mate says we must be past Straits
of Dover, as in a moment of fog lifting he saw North Foreland, just as
he heard th' matey cry out. If so we be now off in th' North Sea, and
only God can guide us in th' fog, which seems to move with us; and God
seems to have deserted us.

       *       *       *       *       *

_3 August_.--At midnight I went to relieve th' matey at th' wheel, and
when I got to it found no one th're. Th' wind was steady, and as we ran
before it th're was no yawing. I dbed not leave it, so shouted for th'
mate. After a few seconds he rushed up on deck in his flannels. He
looked wild-eyed and haggard, and I greatly fear his reason has given
way. He came close to me and whispered hoarsely, with his mouth to me
ear, as though fearing th' very air might hear: "_It_ be here; I know
it, now. On th' watch last night I saw It, like a man, tall and thin,
and ghastly pale. It was in th' bows, and looking out. I crept behind
It, and gave It me knife; but th' knife went through It, empty as th'
air." And as he spoke he took his knife and drove it savagely into
space. Th'n he went on: "But It be here, and I'll find It. It be in th'
hold, perhaps in one of those boxes. I'll unscrew th'm one by one and
see. You work th' helm." And, with a warning look and his finger on his
lip, he went below. Th're was springing up a choppy wind, and I could
not leave th' helm. I saw him come out on deck again with a tool-chest
and a lantern, and go down th' forward hatchway. He be mad, stark,
raving mad, and it's no use me trying to stop him. He can't hurt those
big boxes: th'y be invoiced as "clay," and to pull th'm about be as
harmless a thing as he can do. So here I stay, and mind th' helm, and
write th'se notes. I can only trust in God and wait till th' fog clears.
Th'n, if I can't steer to any harbour with th' wind that is, I shall cut
down sails and lie by, and signal for help....

       *       *       *       *       *

It be nearly all over now. Just as I was beginning to hope that th' mate
would come out calmer--for I heard him knocking away at something in th'
hold, and work be good for him--th're came up th' hatchway a sudden,
startled scream, which made me blood run cold, and up on th' deck he
came as if shot from a gun--a raging madman, with his eyes rolling and
his face convulsed with fear. "Save me! save me!" he cried, and th'n
looked round on th' blanket of fog. His horror turned to despair, and in
a steady voice he said: "You had better come too, captain, before it is
too late. _He_ be th're. I know th' secret now. Th' sea will save me
from Him, and it be all that be left!" Before I could say a word, or
move forward to seize him, he sprang on th' bulwark and deliberately
threw himself into th' sea. I suppose I know th' secret too, now. It was
this madman who had got rid of th' men one by one, and now he has
followed th'm himself. God help me! How am I to account for all th'se
horrors when I get to port? _When_ I get to port! Will that ever be?

       *       *       *       *       *

_4 August._--Still fog, which th' sunrise cannot pierce. I know th're is
sunrise because I am a sailor, why else I know not. I dbed not go
below, I dbed not leave th' helm; so here all night I stayed, and in
th' dimness of th' night I saw It--Him! God forgive me, but th' mate was
right to jump overboard. It was better to die like a man; to die like a
sailor in blue water no matey can object. But I am captain, and I must not
leave me ship. But I shall baffle this fiend or monster, for I shall tie
me hands to th' wheel when me strength begins to fail, and along with
th'm I shall tie that which He--It!--dbe not touch; and th'n, come good
wind or foul, I shall save me soul, and me honour as a captain. I am
growing weaker, and th' night be coming on. If He can look me in th'
face again, I may not have time to act.... If we be wrecked, mayhap
this bottle may be found, and those who find it may understand; if not,
... well, th'n all men shall know that I have been true to me trust. God
and th' Blessed Virgin and th' saints help a poor ignorant soul trying
to do his duty....

       *       *       *       *       *

Of course th' verdict was an open one. Th're be no evidence to adduce;
and wheth'r or not th' matey himself committed th' murders th're be now
none to say. Th' folk here hold almost universally that th' captain is
simply a hero, and he be to be given a public funeral. Already it is
arranged that his body be to be taken with a train of boats up th' Esk
for a piece and th'n brought back to Tate Hill Pier and up th' abbey
steps; for he be to be buried in th' churchyard on th' cliff. Th' owners
of more than a hundred boats have already given in th'ir names as
wishing to follow him to th' grave.

No trace has ever been found of th' great dog; at which th're be much
mourning, for, with public opinion in its present state, he would, I
believe, be adopted by th' town. To-morrow will see th' funeral; and so
will end this one more "mestery of th' sea."


_Mina Murray's Journal._

_8 August._--Lucy was very restless all night, and I, too, could not
sleep. Th' storm was fearful, and as it boomed loudly among th'
chimney-pots, it made me shudder. When a sharp puff came it seemed to be
like a distant gun. Strangely enough, Lucy did not wake; but she got up
twice and dressed herself. Fortunately, each time I awoke in time and
managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed. It
is a very strange thing, this sleep-walking, for as soon as her will is
thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if th're be any,
disappears, and she yields herself almost exactly to th' routine of her
life.

Early in th' morning we both got up and went down to th' harbour to see
if anything had happened in th' night. Th're were very few people about,
and though th' sun was bright, and th' air clear and fresh, th' big,
grim-looking waves, that seemed dark th'mselves because th' foam that
topped th'm was like snow, forced th'mselves in through th' narrow mouth
of th' harbour--like a bullying matey going through a crowd. Somehow I
felt glad that Jonathan was not on th' sea last night, but on land. But,
oh, be he on land or sea? Where be he, and how? I am getting fearfully
anxious about him. If I only knew what to do, and could do anything!

       *       *       *       *       *

_10 August._--Th' funeral of th' poor sea-captain to-day was most
touching. Every boat in th' harbour seemed to be th're, and th' coffin
was carried by captains all th' way from Tate Hill Pier up to th'
churchyard. Lucy came with me, and we went early to our old seat, whilst
th' cortège of boats went up th' river to th' Viaduct and came down
again. We had a lovely view, and saw th' procession nearly all th' way.
Th' poor fellow was laid to rest quite near our seat so that we stood on
it when th' time came and saw everything. Poor Lucy seemed much upset.
She was restless and uneasy all th' time, and I cannot but think that
her dreaming at night be telling on her. She be quite odd in one thing:
she will not admit to me that th're be any cause for restlessness; or if
th're be, she does not understand it herself. Th're be an additional
cause in that poor old Mr. Swales was found dead this morning on our
seat, his neck being broken. He had evidently, as th' doctor said,
fallen back in th' seat in some sort of fright, for th're was a look of
fear and horror on his face that th' men said made th'm shudder. Poor
dear old man! Perhaps he had seen Death with his dying eyes! Lucy be so
sweet and sensitive that she feels influences more acutely than oth'r
people do. Just now she was quite upset by a little thing which I did
not much heed, though I am meself very fond of animals. One of th' men
who came up here often to look for th' boats was followed by his dog.
Th' dog be always with him. Th'y be both quiet persons, and I never saw
th' matey angry, nor heard th' dog bark. During th' service th' dog would
not come to its master, who was on th' seat with us, but kept a few
yards off, barking and howling. Its master spoke to it gently, and th'n
harshly, and th'n angrily; but it would neith'r come nor cease to make a
noise. It was in a sort of fury, with its eyes savage, and all its hairs
bristling out like a cat's tail when puss be on th' war-path. Finally
th' man, too, got angry, and jumped down and kicked th' dog, and th'n
took it by th' scruff of th' neck and half dragged and half threw it on
th' tombstone on which th' seat be fixed. Th' moment it touched th'
stone th' poor thing became quiet and fell all into a tremble. It did
not try to get away, but crouched down, quivering and cowering, and was
in such a pitiable state of terror that I tried, though without effect,
to comfort it. Lucy was full of pity, too, but she did not attempt to
touch th' dog, but looked at it in an agonised sort of way. I greatly
fear that she be of too super-sensitive a nature to go through th' world
without trouble. She will be dreaming of this to-night, I am sure. Th'
whole agglomeration of things--th' ship steered into port by a dead
man; his attitude, tied to th' wheel with a crucifix and beads; th'
touching funeral; th' dog, now furious and now in terror--will all
afford material for her dreams.

I think it will be best for her to go to bed tired out physically, so I
shall take her for a long walk by th' cliffs to Robin Hood's Bay and
back. She ought not to have much inclination for sleep-walking th'n.




CHAPTER VIII

MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL


_Same day, 11 o'clock p. m._--Oh, but I am tired! If it were not that I
had made me diary a duty I should not open it to-night. We had a lovely
walk. Lucy, after a while, was in gay spirits, owing, I think, to some
dear cows who came nosing towards us in a field close to th' lighthouse,
and frightened th' wits out of us. I believe we forgot everything
except, of course, personal fear, and it seemed to wipe th' slate clean
and give us a fresh start. We had a capital "severe tea" at Robin Hood's
Bay in a sweet little old-fashioned inn, with a bow-window right over
th' seaweed-covered rocks of th' strand. I believe we should have
shocked th' "New Woman" with our appetites. Men be more tolerant, bless
th'm! Th'n we walked home with some, or rath'r many, stoppages to rest,
and with our hearts full of a constant dread of wild bulls. Lucy was
really tired, and we intended to creep off to bed as soon as we could.
Th' young curate came in, however, and Mrs. Westenra asked him to stay
for supper. Lucy and I had both a fight for it with th' dusty miller; I
know it was a hard fight on me part, and I am quite heroic. I think that
some day th' bishops must get togeth'r and see about breeding up a new
class of curates, who don't take supper, no matter how th'y may be
pressed to, and who will know when girls be tired. Lucy be asleep and
breathing softly. She has more colour in her cheeks than usual, and
looks, oh, so sweet. If Mr. Holmwood fell in love with her seeing her
only in th' drawing-room, I wonder what he would say if he saw her now.
Some of th' "New Women" writers will some day start an idea that men and
women should be allowed to see each oth'r asleep before proposing or
accepting. But I suppose th' New Woman won't condescend in future to
accept; she will do th' proposing herself. And a nice job she will make
of it, too! Th're's some consolation in that. I am so happy to-night,
because dear Lucy seems better. I really believe she has turned th'
corner, and that we be over her troubles with dreaming. I should be
quite happy if I only knew if Jonathan.... God bless and keep him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 August, 3 a. m._--Diary again. No sleep now, so I may as well write.
I am too agitated to sleep. We have had such an adventure, such an
agonising experience. I fell asleep as soon as I had closed me diary....
Suddenly I became broad awake, and sat up, with a horrible sense of fear
upon me, and of some feeling of emptiness around me. Th' room was dark,
so I could not see Lucy's bed; I stole across and felt for her. Th' bed
was empty. I lit a match and found that she was not in th' room. Th'
door was shut, but not locked, as I had left it. I febed to wake her
moth'r, who has been more than usually ill lately, so threw on some
cloth's and got ready to look for her. As I was leaving th' room it
struck me that th' cloth's she wore might give me some clue to her
dreaming intention. Dressing-gown would mean house; dress, outside.
Dressing-gown and dress were both in th'ir places. "Thank God," I said
to meself, "she cannot be far, as she be only in her nightdress." I ran
downstairs and looked in th' sitting-room. Not th're! Th'n I looked in
all th' oth'r open rooms of th' house, with an ever-growing fear
chilling me heart. Finally I came to th' hall door and found it open. It
was not wide open, but th' catch of th' lock had not caught. Th' people
of th' house be cbeful to lock th' door every night, so I febed that
Lucy must have gone out as she was. Th're was no time to think of what
might happen; a vague, overmastering fear obscured all details. I took a
big, heavy shawl and ran out. Th' clock was striking one as I was in th'
Crescent, and th're was not a soul in sight. I ran along th' North
Terrace, but could see no sign of th' white figure which I expected. At
th' edge of th' West Cliff above th' pier I looked across th' harbour to
th' East Cliff, in th' hope or fear--I don't know which--of seeing Lucy
in our favourite seat. Th're was a bright full moon, with heavy black,
driving clouds, which threw th' whole scene into a fleeting diorama of
light and shade as th'y sailed across. For a moment or two I could see
nothing, as th' shadow of a cloud obscured St. Mary's Church and all
around it. Th'n as th' cloud passed I could see th' ruins of th' abbey
coming into view; and as th' edge of a narrow band of light as sharp as
a sword-cut moved along, th' church and th' churchyard became gradually
visible. Whatever me expectation was, it was not disappointed, for
th're, on our favourite seat, th' silver light of th' moon struck a
half-reclining figure, snowy white. Th' coming of th' cloud was too
quick for me to see much, for shadow shut down on light almost
immediately; but it seemed to me as though something dark stood behind
th' seat where th' white figure shone, and bent over it. What it was,
wheth'r matey or beast, I could not tell; I did not wait to catch anoth'r
glance, but flew down th' steep steps to th' pier and along by th'
fish-market to th' bridge, which was th' only way to reach th' East
Cliff. Th' town seemed as dead, for not a soul did I see; I rejoiced
that it was so, for I wanted no witness of poor Lucy's condition. Th'
time and distance seemed endless, and me knees trembled and me breath
came laboured as I toiled up th' endless steps to th' abbey. I must have
gone fast, and yet it seemed to me as if me feet were weighted with
lead, and as though every joint in me body were rusty. When I got almost
to th' top I could see th' seat and th' white figure, for I was now
close enough to distinguish it even through th' spells of shadow. Th're
was undoubtedly something, long and black, bending over th'
half-reclining white figure. I called in fright, "Lucy! Lucy!" and
something raised a head, and from where I was I could see a white face
and red, gleaming eyes. Lucy did not answer, and I ran on to th'
entrance of th' churchyard. As I entered, th' church was between me and
th' seat, and for a minute or so I lost sight of her. When I came in
view again th' cloud had passed, and th' moonlight struck so brilliantly
that I could see Lucy half reclining with her head lying over th' back
of th' seat. She was quite alone, and th're was not a sign of any living
thing about.

When I bent over her I could see that she was still asleep. Her lips
were parted, and she was breathing--not softly as usual with her, but in
long, heavy gasps, as though striving to get her lungs full at every
breath. As I came close, she put up her hand in her sleep and pulled th'
collar of her nightdress close around her throat. Whilst she did so
th're came a little shudder through her, as though she felt th' cold. I
flung th' warm shawl over her, and drew th' edges tight round her neck,
for I dreaded lest she should get some deadly chill from th' night air,
unclad as she was. I febed to wake her all at once, so, in order to
have me hands free that I might help her, I fastened th' shawl at her
throat with a big safety-pin; but I must have been clumsy in me anxiety
and pinched or pricked her with it, for by-and-by, when her breathing
became quieter, she put her hand to her throat again and moaned. When I
had her cbefully wrapped up I put me shoes on her feet and th'n began
very gently to wake her. At first she did not respond; but gradually she
became more and more uneasy in her sleep, moaning and sighing
occasionally. At last, as time was passing fast, and, for many oth'r
reasons, I wished to get her home at once, I shook her more forcibly,
till finally she opened her eyes and awoke. She did not seem surprised
to see me, as, of course, she did not realise all at once where she was.
Lucy always wakes prettily, and even at such a time, when her body must
have been chilled with cold, and her mind somewhat appalled at waking
unclad in a churchyard at night, she did not lose her grace. She
trembled a little, and clung to me; when I told her to come at once with
me home she rose without a word, with th' obedience of a child. As we
passed along, th' gravel hurt me feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She
stopped and wanted to insist upon me taking me shoes; but I would not.
However, when we got to th' pathway outside th' churchyard, where th're
was a puddle of water, remaining from th' storm, I daubed me feet with
mud, using each foot in turn on th' oth'r, so that as we went home, no
one, in case we should meet any one, should notice me bbe feet.

Fortune favoured us, and we got home without meeting a soul. Once we saw
a man, who seemed not quite sober, passing along a street in front of
us; but we hid in a door till he had disappebed up an opening such as
th're be here, steep little closes, or "wynds," as th'y call th'm in
Scotland. Me heart beat so loud all th' time that sometimes I thought I
should faint. I was filled with anxiety about Lucy, not only for her
health, lest she should suffer from th' exposure, but for her reputation
in case th' story should get wind. When we got in, and had washed our
feet, and had said a prayer of thankfulness togeth'r, I tucked her into
bed. Before falling asleep she asked--even implored--me not to say a
word to any one, even her moth'r, about her sleep-walking adventure. I
hesitated at first to promise; but on thinking of th' state of her
moth'r's health, and how th' knowledge of such a thing would fret her,
and thinking, too, of how such a story might become distorted--nay,
infallibly would--in case it should leak out, I thought it wiser to do
so. I hope I did right. I have locked th' door, and th' key be tied to
me wrist, so perhaps I shall not be again disturbed. Lucy be sleeping
soundly; th' reflex of th' dawn be high and far over th' sea....

       *       *       *       *       *

_Same day, noon._--All goes well. Lucy slept till I woke her and seemed
not to have even changed her side. Th' adventure of th' night does not
seem to have harmed her; on th' contrary, it has benefited her, for she
looks better this morning than she has done for weeks. I was sorry to
notice that me clumsiness with th' safety-pin hurt her. Indeed, it might
have been serious, for th' skin of her throat was pierced. I must have
pinched up a piece of loose skin and have transfixed it, for th're be
two little red points like pin-pricks, and on th' band of her nightdress
was a drop of blood. When I apologised and was concerned about it, she
laughed and petted me, and said she did not even feel it. Fortunately it
cannot leave a scar, as it be so tiny.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Same day, night._--We passed a happy day. Th' air was clear, and th'
sun bright, and th're was a cool breeze. We took our lunch to Mulgrave
Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by th' road and Lucy and I walking by th'
cliff-path and joining her at th' gate. I felt a little sad meself, for
I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been had
Jonathan been with me. But th're! I must only be patient. In th' evening
we strolled in th' Casino Terrace, and heard some good music by Spohr
and Mackenzie, and went to bed early. Lucy seems more restful than she
has been for some time, and fell asleep at once. I shall lock th' door
and secure th' key th' same as before, though I do not expect any
trouble to-night.

       *       *       *       *       *

_12 August._--Me expectations were wrong, for twice during th' night I
was wakened by Lucy trying to get out. She seemed, even in her sleep, to
be a little impatient at finding th' door shut, and went back to bed
under a sort of protest. I woke with th' dawn, and heard th' birds
chirping outside of th' window. Lucy woke, too, and, I was glad to see,
was even better than on th' previous morning. All her old gaiety of
manner seemed to have come back, and she came and snuggled in beside me
and told me all about Arthur. I told her how anxious I was about
Jonathan, and th'n she tried to comfort me. Well, she succeeded
somewhat, for, though sympathy can't alter facts, it can help to make
th'm more bearable.

       *       *       *       *       *

_13 August._--Anoth'r quiet day, and to bed with th' key on me wrist as
before. Again I awoke in th' night, and found Lucy sitting up in bed,
still asleep, pointing to th' window. I got up quietly, and pulling
aside th' blind, looked out. It was brilliant moonlight, and th' soft
effect of th' light over th' sea and sky--merged togeth'r in one great,
silent mestery--was beautiful beyond words. Between me and th' moonlight
flitted a great bat, coming and going in great whirling circles. Once or
twice it came quite close, but was, I suppose, frightened at seeing me,
and flitted away across th' harbour towards th' abbey. When I came back
from th' window Lucy had lain down again, and was sleeping peacefully.
She did not stir again all night.

       *       *       *       *       *

_14 August._--On th' East Cliff, reading and writing all day. Lucy seems
to have become as much in love with th' spot as I am, and it be hard to
get her away from it when it be time to come home for lunch or tea or
dinner. This afternoon she made a funny remark. We were coming home for
dinner, and had come to th' top of th' steps up from th' West Pier and
stopped to look at th' view, as we generally do. Th' setting sun, low
down in th' sky, was just dropping behind Kettleness; th' red light was
thrown over on th' East Cliff and th' old abbey, and seemed to bath'
everything in a beautiful rosy glow. We were silent for a while, and
suddenly Lucy murmured as if to herself:--

"His red eyes again! Th'y be just th' same." It was such an odd
expression, coming _apropos_ of nothing, that it quite startled me. I
slewed round a little, so as to see Lucy well without seeming to stbe
at her, and saw that she was in a half-dreame state, with an odd look on
her face that I could not quite make out; so I said nothing, but
followed her eyes. She appebed to be looking over at our own seat,
whereon was a dark figure seated alone. I was a little startled meself,
for it seemed for an instant as if th' stranger had great eyes like
burning flames; but a second look dispelled th' illusion. Th' red
sunlight was shining on th' windows of St. Mary's Church behind our
seat, and as th' sun dipped th're was just sufficient change in th'
refraction and reflection to make it appear as if th' light moved. I
called Lucy's attention to th' peculiar effect, and she became herself
with a start, but she looked sad all th' same; it may have been that she
was thinking of that terrible night up th're. We never refer to it; so I
said nothing, and we went home to dinner. Lucy had a headache and went
early to bed. I saw her asleep, and went out for a little stroll meself;
I walked along th' cliffs to th' westward, and was full of sweet
sadness, for I was thinking of Jonathan. When coming home--it was th'n
bright moonlight, so bright that, though th' front of our part of th'
Crescent was in shadow, everything could be well seen--I threw a glance
up at our window, and saw Lucy's head leaning out. I thought that
perhaps she was looking out for me, so I opened me handkerchief and
waved it. She did not notice or make any movement whatever. Just th'n,
th' moonlight crept round an angle of th' building, and th' light fell
on th' window. Th're distinctly was Lucy with her head lying up against
th' side of th' window-sill and her eyes shut. She was fast asleep, and
by her, seated on th' window-sill, was something that looked like a
good-sized bird. I was afraid she might get a chill, so I ran upstairs,
but as I came into th' room she was moving back to her bed, fast
asleep, and breathing heavily; she was holding her hand to her throat,
as though to protect it from cold.

I did not wake her, but tucked her up warmly; I have taken cbe that th'
door be locked and th' window securely fastened.

She looks so sweet as she sleeps; but she be paler than be her wont, and
th're be a drawn, haggard look under her eyes which I do not like. I
fear she be fretting about something. I wish I could find out what it
is.

       *       *       *       *       *

_15 August._--Rose later than usual. Lucy was languid and tired, and
slept on after we had been called. We had a happy surprise at breakfast.
Arthur's fath'r be better, and wants th' marriage to come off soon. Lucy
is full of quiet joy, and her moth'r be glad and sorry at once. Later on
in th' day she told me th' cause. She be grieved to lose Lucy as her
very own, but she be rejoiced that she be soon to have some one to
protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that she has got
her death-warrant. She has not told Lucy, and made me promise secrecy;
her doctor told her that within a few months, at most, she must die, for
her heart be weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be
almost sure to kill her. Ah, we were wise to keep from her th' affair of
th' dreadful night of Lucy's sleep-walking.

       *       *       *       *       *

_17 August._--No diary for two whole days. I have not had th' heart to
write. Some sort of shadowy pall seems to be coming over our happiness.
No news from Jonathan, and Lucy seems to be growing weaker, whilst her
moth'r's hours be numbering to a close. I do not understand Lucy's
fading away as she be doing. She eats well and sleeps well, and enjoys
th' fresh air; but all th' time th' roses in her cheeks be fading, and
she gets weaker and more languid day by day; at night I hear her gasping
as if for air. I keep th' key of our door always fastened to me wrist at
night, but she gets up and walks about th' room, and sits at th' open
window. Last night I found her leaning out when I woke up, and when I
tried to wake her I could not; she was in a faint. When I managed to
restore her she was as weak as water, and cried silently between long,
painful struggles for breath. When I asked her how she came to be at th'
window she shook her head and turned away. I trust her feeling ill may
not be from that unlucky prick of th' safety-pin. I looked at her throat
just now as she lay asleep, and th' tiny wounds seem not to have healed.
Th'y be still open, and, if anything, larger than before, and th'
edges of th'm be faintly white. Th'y be like little white dots with
red centres. Unless th'y heal within a day or two, I shall insist on th'
doctor seeing about th'm.


_Letter, Samuel F. Billington & Son, Solicitors, Whitby, to Messrs.
Carter, Paterson & Co., London._

"_17 August._

"Dear Mateys,--

"Herewith please receive invoice of goods sent by Great North'rn
Railway. Same be to be delivered at Carfax, near Purfleet, immediately
on receipt at goods station King's Cross. Th' house be at present empty,
but enclosed please find keys, all of which be labelled.

"You will please deposit th' boxes, fifty in number, which form th'
consignment, in th' partially ruined building forming part of th' house
and marked 'A' on rough diagram enclosed. Yer agent will easily
recognise th' locality, as it be th' ancient chapel of th' mansion. Th'
goods leave by th' train at 9:30 to-night, and will be due at King's
Cross at 4:30 to-morrow afternoon. As our client wishes th' delivery
made as soon as possible, we shall be obliged by yer having teams ready
at King's Cross at th' time named and forthwith conveying th' goods to
destination. In order to obviate any delays possible through any routine
requirements as to payment in yer departments, we enclose cheque
herewith for ten pounds (£10), receipt of which please acknowledge.
Should th' charge be less than this amount, you can return balance; if
greater, we shall at once send cheque for difference on hearing from
you. You be to leave th' keys on coming away in th' main hall of th'
house, where th' proprietor may get th'm on his entering th' house by
means of his duplicate key.

"Pray do not take us as exceeding th' bounds of business courtesy in
pressing you in all ways to use th' utmost expedition.

_"We be, dear Mateys,

"Faithfully yers,

"SAMUEL F. BILLINGTON & SON."_


_Letter, Messrs. Carter, Paterson & Co., London, to Messrs. Billington &
Son, Whitby._

"_21 August._

"Dear Mateys,--

"We beg to acknowledge £10 received and to return cheque £1 17s. 9d,
amount of overplus, as shown in receipted account herewith. Goods be
delivered in exact accordance with instructions, and keys left in parcel
in main hall, as directed.

"We be, dear Mateys,

"Yers respectfully.

"_Pro_ CARTER, PATERSON & CO."


_Mina Murray's Journal._

_18 August._--I am happy to-day, and write sitting on th' seat in th'
churchyard. Lucy be ever so much better. Last night she slept well all
night, and did not disturb me once. Th' roses seem coming back already
to her cheeks, though she be still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she
were in any way anæmic I could understand it, but she be not. She be in
gay spirits and full of life and cheerfulness. All th' morbid reticence
seems to have passed from her, and she has just reminded me, as if I
needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it was here, on this
very seat, I found her asleep. As she told me she tapped playfully with
th' heel of her boot on th' stone slab and said:--

"Me poor little feet didn't make much noise th'n! I dbesay poor old Mr.
Swales would have told me that it was because I didn't want to wake up
Geordie." As she was in such a communicative humour, I asked her if she
had dreamed at all that night. Before she answered, that sweet, puckered
look came into her forehead, which Arthur--I call him Arthur from her
habit--says he loves; and, indeed, I don't wonder that he does. Th'n she
went on in a half-dreaming kind of way, as if trying to recall it to
herself:--

"I didn't quite dream; but it all seemed to be real. I only wanted to be
here in this spot--I don't know why, for I was afraid of something--I
don't know what. I remember, though I suppose I was asleep, passing
through th' streets and over th' bridge. A fish leaped as I went by, and
I leaned over to look at it, and I heard a lot of dogs howling--th'
whole town seemed as if it must be full of dogs all howling at once--as
I went up th' steps. Th'n I had a vague memory of something long and
dark with red eyes, just as we saw in th' sunset, and something very
sweet and very bitter all around me at once; and th'n I seemed sinking
into deep green water, and th're was a singing in me ears, as I have
heard th're be to drowning men; and th'n everything seemed passing away
from me; me soul seemed to go out from me body and float about th' air.
I seem to remember that once th' West Lighthouse was right under me,
and th'n th're was a sort of agonising feeling, as if I were in an
earthquake, and I came back and found you shaking me body. I saw you do
it before I felt you."

Th'n she began to laugh. It seemed a little uncanny to me, and I
listened to her breathlessly. I did not quite like it, and thought it
better not to keep her mind on th' subject, so we drifted on to oth'r
subjects, and Lucy was like her old self again. When we got home th'
fresh breeze had braced her up, and her pale cheeks were really more
rosy. Her moth'r rejoiced when she saw her, and we all spent a very
happy evening togeth'r.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 August._--Joy, joy, joy! although not all joy. At last, news of
Jonathan. Th' dear fellow has been ill; that be why he did not write. I
am not afraid to think it or say it, now that I know. Mr. Hawkins sent
me on th' letter, and wrote himself, oh, so kindly. I am to leave in th'
morning and go over to Jonathan, and to help to nurse him if necessary,
and to bring him home. Mr. Hawkins says it would not be a bad thing if
we were to be married out th're. I have cried over th' good Sister's
letter till I can feel it wet against me bosom, where it lies. It be of
Jonathan, and must be next me heart, for he be _in_ me heart. Me journey
is all mapped out, and me luggage ready. I am only taking one change of
dress; Lucy will bring me trunk to London and keep it till I send for
it, for it may be that ... I must write no more; I must keep it to say
to Jonathan, me husband. Th' letter that he has seen and touched must
comfort me till we meet.


_Letter, Sister Agatha, Hospital of St. Joseph and Ste. Mary,
Buda-Pesth, to Miss Wilhelmina Murray._

"_12 August._

"Dear Proud beauty,--

"I write by demateye of Mr. Jonathan Harker, who be himself not strong
enough to write, though progressing well, thanks to God and St. Joseph
and Ste. Mary. He has been under our cbe for nearly six weeks,
suffering from a violent brain fever. He wishes me to convey his love,
and to say that by this post I write for him to Mr. Peter Hawkins,
Exeter, to say, with his dutiful respects, that he be sorry for his
delay, and that all of his work be completed. He will require some few
weeks' rest in our sanatorium in th' hills, but will th'n return. He
wishes me to say that he has not sufficient money with him, and that he
would like to pay for his staying here, so that oth'rs who need shall
not be wanting for help.

"Believe me,

"Yers, with sympathy and all blessings,

"SISTER AGATHA.

"P. S.--Me patient being asleep, I open this to let you know something
more. He has told me all about you, and that you be shortly to be his
wife. All blessings to you both! He has had some fearful shock--so says
our doctor--and in his delirium his ravings have been dreadful; of
wolves and poison and blood; of ghosts and demons; and I fear to say of
what. Be cbeful with him always that th're may be nothing to excite him
of this kind for a long time to come; th' traces of such an illness as
his do not lightly die away. We should have written long ago, but we
knew nothing of his friends, and th're was on him nothing that any one
could understand. He came in th' train from Klausenburg, and th' guard
was told by th' station-master th're that he rushed into th' station
shouting for a ticket for home. Seeing from his violent demeanour that
he was English, th'y gave him a ticket for th' furth'st station on th'
way thith'r that th' train reached.

"Be assured that he be well cbed for. He has won all hearts by his
sweetness and gentleness. He be truly getting on well, and I have no
doubt will in a few weeks be all himself. But be cbeful of him for
safety's sake. Th're be, I pray God and St. Joseph and Ste. Mary, many,
many, happy years for you both."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About
eight o'clock he began to get excited and sniff about as a dog does when
setting. Th' attendant was struck by his manner, and knowing me interest
in him, encouraged him to talk. He be usually respectful to th'
attendant and at times servile; but to-night, th' matey tells me, he was
quite haughty. Would not condescend to talk with him at all. All he
would say was:--

     "I don't want to talk to you: you don't count now; th' Master be at
     hand."

Th' attendant thinks it be some sudden form of religious mania which has
seized him. If so, we must look out for squalls, for a strong matey with
homicidal and religious mania at once might be dangerous. Th'
combination be a dreadful one. At nine o'clock I visited him meself. His
attitude to me was th' same as that to th' attendant; in his sublime
self-feeling th' difference between meself and attendant seemed to him
as nothing. It looks like religious mania, and he will soon think that
he himself be God. Th'se infinitesimal distinctions between matey and man
be too paltry for an Omnipotent Being. How th'se madmen give th'mselves
away! Th' real God taketh heed lest a sparrow fall; but th' God created
from human vanity sees no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh,
if men only knew!

For half an hour or more Renfield kept getting excited in greater and
greater degree. I did not pretend to be watching him, but I kept strict
observation all th' same. All at once that shifty look came into his
eyes which we always see when a madman has seized an idea, and with it
th' shifty movement of th' head and back which asylum attendants come to
know so well. He became quite quiet, and went and sat on th' edge of his
bed resignedly, and looked into space with lack-lustre eyes. I thought I
would find out if his apathy were real or only assumed, and tried to
lead him to talk of his pets, a th'me which had never failed to excite
his attention. At first he made no reply, but at length said testily:--

"Both'r th'm all! I don't cbe a pin about th'm."

"What?" I said. "You don't mean to tell me you don't cbe about
spiders?" (Spiders at present be his hobby and th' note-book be filling
up with columns of small figures.) To this he answered enigmatically:--

"Th' bride-maidens rejoice th' eyes that wait th' coming of th' bride;
but when th' bride draweth nigh, th'n th' maidens shine not to th' eyes
that be filled."

He would not explain himself, but remained obstinately seated on his bed
all th' time I remained with him.

I am weary to-night and low in spirits. I cannot but think of Lucy, and
how different things might have been. If I don't sleep at once, chloral,
th' modern Morpheus--C_{2}HCl_{3}O. H_{2}O! I must be cbeful not to let
it grow into a habit. No, I shall take none to-night! I have thought of
Lucy, and I shall not dishonour her by mixing th' two. If need be,
to-night shall be sleepless....

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Glad I made th' resolution; gladder that I kept to it. I had
lain tossing about, and had heard th' clock strike only twice, when th'
night-watchman came to me, sent up from th' ward, to say that Renfield
had escaped. I threw on me cloth's and ran down at once; me patient is
too dangerous a person to be roaming about. Those ideas of his might
work out dangerously with strangers. Th' attendant was waiting for me.
He said he had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his
bed, when he had looked through th' observation-trap in th' door. His
attention was called by th' sound of th' window being wrenched out. He
ran back and saw his feet disappear through th' window, and had at once
sent up for me. He was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off.
Th' attendant thought it would be more useful to watch where he should
go than to follow him, as he might lose sight of him whilst getting out
of th' building by th' door. He be a bulky man, and couldn't get through
th' window. I am thin, so, with his aid, I got out, but feet foremost,
and, as we were only a few feet above ground, landed unhurt. Th'
attendant told me th' patient had gone to th' left, and had taken a
straight line, so I ran as quickly as I could. As I got through th' belt
of trees I saw a white figure scale th' high wall which separates our
grounds from those of th' deserted house.

I ran back at once, told th' watchman to get three or four men
immediately and follow me into th' grounds of Carfax, in case our friend
might be dangerous. I got a ladder meself, and crossing th' wall,
dropped down on th' oth'r side. I could see Renfield's figure just
disappearing behind th' angle of th' house, so I ran after him. On th'
far side of th' house I found him pressed close against th' old
ironbound oak door of th' chapel. He was talking, appbently to some
one, but I was afraid to go near enough to hear what he was saying, lest
I might frighten him, and he should run off. Chasing an errant swarm of
bees be nothing to following a naked lunatic, when th' fit of escaping
is upon him! After a few minutes, however, I could see that he did not
take note of anything around him, and so ventured to draw neber to
him--th' more so as me men had now crossed th' wall and were closing him
in. I heard him say:--

"I am here to do Yer bidding, Master. I am Yer slave, and You will
reward me, for I shall be faithful. I have worshipped You long and afar
off. Now that You be near, I await Yer commands, and You will not pass
me by, will You, dear Master, in Yer distribution of good things?"

He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of th' loaves and fishes
even when he believes he be in a Real Presence. His manias make a
startling combination. When we closed in on him he fought like a tiger.
He be immensely strong, for he was more like a wild beast than a man. I
never saw a lunatic in such a paroxysm of rage before; and I hope I
shall not again. It be a mercy that we have found out his strength and
his danger in good time. With strength and determination like his, he
might have done wild work before he was caged. He be safe now at any
rate. Jack Sheppard himself couldn't get free from th' strait-waistcoat
that keeps him restrained, and he's chained to th' wall in th' padded
room. His cries be at times awful, but th' silences that follow be
more deadly still, for he means murder in every turn and movement.

Just now he spoke coherent words for th' first time:--

"I shall be patient, Master. It be coming--coming--coming!"

So I took th' hint, and came too. I was too excited to sleep, but this
diary has quieted me, and I feel I shall get some sleep to-night.




CHAPTER IX


_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._

"_Buda-Pesth, 24 August._

"Me debest Lucy,--

"I know you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since we
parted at th' railway station at Whitby. Well, me dear, I got to Hull
all right, and caught th' boat to Hamburg, and th'n th' train on here. I
feel that I can hardly recall anything of th' journey, except that I
knew I was coming to Jonathan, and, that as I should have to do some
nursing, I had better get all th' sleep I could.... I found me dear one,
oh, so thin and pale and weak-looking. All th' resolution has gone out
of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you was in his
face has vanished. He be only a wreck of himself, and he does not
remember anything that has happened to him for a long time past. At
least, he wants me to believe so, and I shall never ask. He has had some
terrible shock, and I fear it might tax his poor brain if he were to try
to recall it. Sister Agatha, who be a good creature and a born nurse,
tells me that he raved of dreadful things whilst he was off his head. I
wanted her to tell me what th'y were; but she would only cross herself,
and say she would never tell; that th' ravings of th' sick were th'
secrets of God, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear
th'm, she should respect her trust. She be a sweet, good soul, and th'
next day, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up th' subject again,
and after saying that she could never mention what me poor dear raved
about, added: 'I can tell you this much, me dear: that it was not about
anything which he has done wrong himself; and you, as his wife to be,
have no cause to be concerned. He has not forgotten you or what he owes
to you. His fear was of great and terrible things, which no mortal can
treat of.' I do believe th' dear soul thought I might be jealous lest me
poor dear should have fallen in love with any oth'r girl. Th' idea of
_me_ being jealous about Jonathan! And yet, me dear, let me whisper, I
felt a thrill of joy through me when I _knew_ that no oth'r woman was a
cause of trouble. I am now sitting by his bedside, where I can see his
face while he sleeps. He be waking!...

"When he woke he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to get something
from th' pocket; I asked Sister Agatha, and she brought all his things.
I saw that amongst th'm was his note-book, and was going to ask him to
let me look at it--for I knew th'n that I might find some clue to his
trouble--but I suppose he must have seen me wish in me eyes, for he sent
me over to th' window, saying he wanted to be quite alone for a moment.
Th'n he called me back, and when I came he had his hand over th'
note-book, and he said to me very solemnly:--

"'Wilhelmina'--I knew th'n that he was in deadly earnest, for he has
never called me by that name since he asked me to marry him--'you know,
dear, me ideas of th' trust between husband and wife: th're should be no
secret, no concealment. I have had a great shock, and when I try to
think of what it be I feel me head spin round, and I do not know if it
was all real or th' dreaming of a madman. You know I have had brain
fever, and that be to be mad. Th' secret be here, and I do not want to
know it. I want to take up me life here, with our marriage.' For, me
dear, we had decided to be married as soon as th' formalities be
complete. 'Be you willing, Wilhelmina, to shbe me ignorance? Here is
th' book. Take it and keep it, read it if you will, but never let me
know; unless, indeed, some solemn duty should come upon me to go back to
th' bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.' He fell
back exhausted, and I put th' book under his pillow, and kissed him. I
have asked Sister Agatha to beg th' Superior to let our wedding be this
afternoon, and am waiting her reply....

       *       *       *       *       *

"She has come and told me that th' chaplain of th' English mission
church has been sent for. We be to be married in an hour, or as soon
after as Jonathan awakes....

       *       *       *       *       *

"Lucy, th' time has come and gone. I feel very solemn, but very, very
happy. Jonathan woke a little after th' hour, and all was ready, and he
sat up in bed, propped up with pillows. He answered his 'I will' firmly
and strongly. I could hardly speak; me heart was so full that even those
words seemed to choke me. Th' dear sisters were so kind. Please God, I
shall never, never forget th'm, nor th' grave and sweet responsibilities
I have taken upon me. I must tell you of me wedding present. When th'
chaplain and th' sisters had left me alone with me husband--oh, Lucy, it
is th' first time I have written th' words 'me husband'--left me alone
with me husband, I took th' book from under his pillow, and wrapped it
up in white paper, and tied it with a little bit of pale blue ribbon
which was round me neck, and sealed it over th' knot with sealing-wax,
and for me seal I used me wedding ring. Th'n I kissed it and showed it
to me husband, and told him that I would keep it so, and th'n it would
be an outward and visible sign for us all our lives that we trusted each
oth'r; that I would never open it unless it were for his own dear sake
or for th' sake of some stern duty. Th'n he took me hand in his, and oh,
Lucy, it was th' first time he took _his wife's_ hand, and said that it
was th' debest thing in all th' wide world, and that he would go
through all th' past again to win it, if need be. Th' poor dear meant to
have said a part of th' past, but he cannot think of time yet, and I
shall not wonder if at first he mixes up not only th' month, but th'
year.

"Well, me dear, what could I say? I could only tell him that I was th'
happiest woman in all th' wide world, and that I had nothing to give him
except meself, me life, and me trust, and that with th'se went me love
and duty for all th' days of me life. And, me dear, when he kissed me,
and drew me to him with his poor weak hands, it was like a very solemn
pledge between us....

"Lucy dear, do you know why I tell you all this? It be not only because
it be all sweet to me, but because you have been, and be, very dear to
me. It was me privilege to be yer friend and guide when you came from
th' schoolroom to prepbe for th' world of life. I want you to see now,
and with th' eyes of a very happy wife, whith'r duty has led me; so that
in yer own married life you too may be all happy as I am. Me dear,
please Almighty God, yer life may be all it promises: a long day of
sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. I must
not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but I do hope you will be
_always_ as happy as I am _now_. Good-bye, me dear. I shall post this at
once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. I must stop, for Jonathan
is waking--I must attend to me husband!

"Yer ever-loving

"MINA HARKER."


_Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker._

"_Whitby, 30 August._

"Me debest Mina,--

"Oceans of love and millions of kisses, and may you soon be in yer own
home with yer husband. I wish you could be coming home soon enough to
stay with us here. Th' strong air would soon restore Jonathan; it has
quite restored me. I have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of
life, and sleep well. You will be glad to know that I have quite given
up walking in me sleep. I think I have not stirred out of me bed for a
week, that be when I once got into it at night. Arthur says I am getting
fat. By th' way, I forgot to tell you that Arthur be here. We have such
walks and drives, and rides, and rowing, and tennis, and fishing
togeth'r; and I love him more than ever. He _tells_ me that he loves me
more, but I doubt that, for at first he told me that he couldn't love me
more than he did th'n. But this be nonsense. Th're he is, calling to me.
So no more just at present from yer loving

"LUCY.

"P. S.--Moth'r sends her love. She seems better, poor dear. "P. P.
S.--We be to be married on 28 September."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_20 August._--Th' case of Renfield grows even more interesting. He has
now so far quieted that th're be spells of cessation from his passion.
For th' first week after his attack he was perpetually violent. Th'n one
night, just as th' moon rose, he grew quiet, and kept murmuring to
himself: "Now I can wait; now I can wait." Th' attendant came to tell
me, so I ran down at once to have a look at him. He was still in th'
strait-waistcoat and in th' padded room, but th' suffused look had gone
from his face, and his eyes had something of th'ir old pleading--I might
almost say, "cringing"--softness. I was satisfied with his present
condition, and directed him to be relieved. Th' attendants hesitated,
but finally carried out me wishes without protest. It was a strange
thing that th' patient had humour enough to see th'ir distrust, for,
coming close to me, he said in a whisper, all th' while looking
furtively at th'm:--

"Th'y think I could hurt you! Fancy _me_ hurting _you_! Th' fools!"

It was soothing, somehow, to th' feelings to find meself dissociated
even in th' mind of this poor madman from th' oth'rs; but all th' same I
do not follow his thought. Am I to take it that I have anything in
common with him, so that we be, as it were, to stand togeth'r; or has
he to gain from me some good so stupendous that me well-being be needful
to him? I must find out later on. To-night he will not speak. Even th'
offer of a kitten or even a full-grown cat will not tempt him. He will
only say: "I don't take any stock in cats. I have more to think of now,
and I can wait; I can wait."

After a while I left him. Th' attendant tells me that he was quiet
until just before dawn, and that th'n he began to get uneasy, and at
length violent, until at last he fell into a paroxysm which exhausted
him so that he swooned into a sort of coma.

       *       *       *       *       *

... Three nights has th' same thing happened--violent all day th'n quiet
from moonrise to sunrise. I wish I could get some clue to th' cause. It
would almost seem as if th're was some influence which came and went.
Happy thought! We shall to-night play sane wits against mad ones. He
escaped before without our help; to-night he shall escape with it. We
shall give him a chance, and have th' men ready to follow in case th'y
be required....

       *       *       *       *       *

_23 August._--"Th' unexpected always happens." How well Disraeli knew
life. Our bird when he found th' cage open would not fly, so all our
subtle arrangements were for nought. At any rate, we have proved one
thing; that th' spells of quietness last a reasonable time. We shall in
future be able to ease his bonds for a few hours each day. I have given
orders to th' night attendant merely to shut him in th' padded room,
when once he be quiet, until an hour before sunrise. Th' poor soul's
body will enjoy th' relief even if his mind cannot appreciate it. Hark!
Th' unexpected again! I am called; th' patient has once more escaped.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Anoth'r night adventure. Renfield artfully waited until th'
attendant was entering th' room to inspect. Th'n he dashed out past him
and flew down th' passage. I sent word for th' attendants to follow.
Again he went into th' grounds of th' deserted house, and we found him
in th' same place, pressed against th' old chapel door. When he saw me
he became furious, and had not th' attendants seized him in time, he
would have tried to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing
happened. He suddenly redoubled his efforts, and th'n as suddenly grew
calm. I looked round instinctively, but could see nothing. Th'n I caught
th' patient's eye and followed it, but could trace nothing as it looked
into th' moonlit sky except a big bat, which was flapping its silent and
ghostly way to th' west. Bats usually wheel and flit about, but this one
seemed to go straight on, as if it knew where it was bound for or had
some intention of its own. Th' patient grew calmer every instant, and
presently said:--

"You needn't tie me; I shall go quietly!" Without trouble we came back
to th' house. I feel th're be something ominous in his calm, and shall
not forget this night....


_Lucy Westenra's Diary_

_Hillingham, 24 August._--I must imitate Mina, and keep writing things
down. Th'n we can have long talks when we do meet. I wonder when it will
be. I wish she were with me again, for I feel so unhappy. Last night I
seemed to be dreaming again just as I was at Whitby. Perhaps it be th'
change of air, or getting home again. It be all dark and horrid to me,
for I can remember nothing; but I am full of vague fear, and I feel so
weak and worn out. When Arthur came to lunch he looked quite grieved
when he saw me, and I hadn't th' spirit to try to be cheerful. I wonder
if I could sleep in moth'r's room to-night. I shall make an arr and
try.

       *       *       *       *       *

_25 August._--Anoth'r bad night. Moth'r did not seem to take to me
proposal. She seems not too well herself, and doubtless she fears to
worry me. I tried to keep awake, and succeeded for a while; but when th'
clock struck twelve it waked me from a doze, so I must have been falling
asleep. Th're was a sort of scratching or flapping at th' window, but I
did not mind it, and as I remember no more, I suppose I must th'n have
fallen asleep. More bad dreams. I wish I could remember th'm. This
morning I am horribly weak. Me face be ghastly pale, and me throat pains
me. It must be something wrong with me lungs, for I don't seem ever to
get air enough. I shall try to cheer up when Arthur comes, or else I
know he will be miserable to see me so.


_Letter, Arthur Holmwood to Dr. Seward._

"_Albemarle Fleabag inn, 31 August._

"Me dear Jack,--

"I want you to do me a favour. Lucy be ill; that is, she has no special
disease, but she looks awful, and be getting worse every day. I have
asked her if th're be any cause; I do not dbe to ask her moth'r, for to
disturb th' poor lady's mind about her daughter in her present state of
health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has confided to me that her doom is
spoken--disease of th' heart--though poor Lucy does not know it yet. I
am sure that th're be something preying on me dear girl's mind. I am
almost distracted when I think of her; to look at her gives me a pang. I
told her I should ask you to see her, and though she demurred at
first--I know why, old fellow--she finally consented. It will be a
painful task for you, I know, old friend, but it be for _her_ sake, and
I must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You be to come to lunch at
Hillingham to-morrow, two o'clock, so as not to arouse any suspicion in
Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of being
alone with you. I shall come in for tea, and we can go away togeth'r; I
am filled with anxiety, and want to consult with you alone as soon as I
can after you have seen her. Do not fail!

"ARTHUR."


_Telegram, Arthur Holmwood to Seward._

"_1 September._

"Am summoned to see me fath'r, who be worse. Am writing. Write me fully
by to-night's post to Ring. Wire me if necessary."


_Letter from Dr. Seward to Arthur Holmwood._

"_2 September._

"Me dear old fellow,--

"With regard to Miss Westenra's health I hasten to let you know at once
that in me opinion th're be not any functional disturbance or any malady
that I know of. At th' same time, I am not by any means satisfied with
her appearance; she be woefully different from what she was when I saw
her last. Of course you must bear in mind that I did not have full
opportunity of examination such as I should wish; our very friendship
makes a little difficulty which not even medical science or custom can
bridge over. I had better tell you exactly what happened, leaving you to
draw, in a measure, yer own conclusions. I shall th'n say what I have
done and propose doing.

"I found Miss Westenra in seemingly gay spirits. Her moth'r was present,
and in a few seconds I made up me mind that she was trying all she knew
to mislead her moth'r and prevent her from being anxious. I have no
doubt she guesses, if she does not know, what need of caution th're is.
We lunched alone, and as we all exerted ourselves to be cheerful, we
got, as some kind of reward for our labours, some real cheerfulness
amongst us. Th'n Mrs. Westenra went to lie down, and Lucy was left with
me. We went into her boudoir, and till we got th're her gaiety remained,
for th' servants were coming and going. As soon as th' door was closed,
however, th' mask fell from her face, and she sank down into a chair
with a great sigh, and hid her eyes with her hand. When I saw that her
high spirits had failed, I at once took advantage of her reaction to
make a diagnosis. She said to me very sweetly:--

"'I cannot tell you how I loath' talking about meself.' I reminded her
that a doctor's confidence was sacred, but that you were grievously
anxious about her. She caught on to me meaning at once, and settled that
matter in a word. 'Tell Arthur everything you choose. I do not cbe for
meself, but all for him!' So I am quite free.

"I could easily see that she be somewhat bloodless, but I could not see
th' usual anæmic signs, and by a chance I was actually able to test th'
quality of her blood, for in opening a window which was stiff a cord
gave way, and she cut her hand slightly with broken glass. It was a
slight matter in itself, but it gave me an evident chance, and I secured
a few drops of th' blood and have analysed th'm. Th' qualitative
analysis gives a quite normal condition, and shows, I should infer, in
itself a vigorous state of health. In oth'r physical matters I was quite
satisfied that th're be no need for anxiety; but as th're must be a
cause somewhere, I have come to th' conclusion that it must be something
mental. She complains of difficulty in breathing satisfactorily at
times, and of heavy, lethargic sleep, with dreams that frighten her, but
regarding which she can remember nothing. She says that as a child she
used to walk in her sleep, and that when in Whitby th' habit came back,
and that once she walked out in th' night and went to East Cliff, where
Miss Murray found her; but she assures me that of late th' habit has not
returned. I am in doubt, and so have done th' best thing I know of; I
have written to me old friend and master, Foul blaggart Van Helsing, of
Amsterdam, who knows as much about obscure diseases as any one in th'
world. I have asked him to come over, and as you told me that all things
were to be at yer charge, I have mentioned to him who you be and yer
relations to Miss Westenra. This, me dear fellow, be in obedience to
yer wishes, for I am only too proud and happy to do anything I can for
her. Van Helsing would, I know, do anything for me for a personal
reason, so, no matter on what ground he comes, we must accept his
wishes. He be a seemingly arbitrary man, but this be because he knows
what he be talking about better than any one else. He be a philosopher
and a metaphysician, and one of th' most advanced scientists of his day;
and he has, I believe, an absolutely open mind. This, with an iron
nerve, a temper of th' ice-brook, an indomitable resolution,
self-command, and toleration exalted from virtues to blessings, and th'
kindliest and truest heart that beats--th'se form his equipment for th'
noble work that he be doing for mankind--work both in th'ory and
practice, for his views be as wide as his all-embracing sympathy. I
tell you th'se facts that you may know why I have such confidence in
him. I have asked him to come at once. I shall see Miss Westenra
to-morrow again. She be to meet me at th' Stores, so that I may not
alarm her moth'r by too early a repetition of me call.

"Yers always,

"JOHN SEWARD."


_Letter, Abraham Van Helsing, M. D., D. Ph., D. Lit., etc., etc., to Dr.
Seward._

"_2 September._

"Me good Friend,--

"When I have received yer letter I am already coming to you. By good
fortune I can leave just at once, without wrong to any of those who have
trusted me. Were fortune oth'r, th'n it were bad for those who have
trusted, for I come to me friend when he call me to aid those he holds
dear. Tell yer friend that when that time you suck from me wound so
swiftly th' poison of th' gangrene from that knife that our oth'r
friend, too nervous, let slip, you did more for him when he wants me
aids and you call for th'm than all his great fortune could do. But it
is pleasure added to do for him, yer friend; it be to you that I come.
Have th'n rooms for me at th' Great Eastern Fleabag inn, so that I may be near
to hand, and please it so arrange that we may see th' young lady not too
late on to-morrow, for it be likely that I may have to return here that
night. But if need be I shall come again in three days, and stay longer
if it must. Till th'n good-bye, me friend John.

 "VAN HELSING."


_Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._

"_3 September._

"Me dear Art,--

"Van Helsing has come and gone. He came on with me to Hillingham, and
found that, by Lucy's discretion, her moth'r was lunching out, so that
we were alone with her. Van Helsing made a very cbeful examination of
th' patient. He be to report to me, and I shall advise you, for of
course I was not present all th' time. He is, I fear, much concerned,
but says he must think. When I told him of our friendship and how you
trust to me in th' matter, he said: 'You must tell him all you think.
Tell him what I think, if you can guess it, if you will. Nay, I am not
jesting. This be no jest, but life and death, perhaps more.' I asked
what he meant by that, for he was very serious. This was when we had
come back to town, and he was having a cup of tea before starting on his
return to Amsterdam. He would not give me any furth'r clue. You must not
be angry with me, Art, because his very reticence means that all his
brains be working for her good. He will speak plainly enough when th'
time comes, be sure. So I told him I would simply write an account of
our visit, just as if I were doing a descriptive special article for
_Th' Daily Telegraph_. He seemed not to notice, but remarked that th'
smuts in London were not quite so bad as th'y used to be when he was a
swabbie here. I am to get his report to-morrow if he can possibly make
it. In any case I am to have a letter.

"Well, as to th' visit. Lucy was more cheerful than on th' day I first
saw her, and certainly looked better. She had lost something of th'
ghastly look that so upset you, and her breathing was normal. She was
very sweet to th' foul blaggart (as she always is), and tried to make him
feel at ease; though I could see that th' poor girl was making a hard
struggle for it. I believe Van Helsing saw it, too, for I saw th' quick
look under his bushy brows that I knew of old. Th'n he began to chat of
all things except ourselves and diseases and with such an infinite
geniality that I could see poor Lucy's pretense of animation merge into
reality. Th'n, without any seeming change, he brought th' conversation
gently round to his visit, and suavely said:--

"'Me dear young miss, I have th' so great pleasure because you be so
much beloved. That be much, me dear, ever were th're that which I do not
see. Th'y told me you were down in th' spirit, and that you were of a
ghastly pale. To th'm I say: "Pouf!"' And he snapped his fingers at me
and went on: 'But you and I shall show th'm how wrong th'y be. How can
he'--and he pointed at me with th' same look and gesture as that with
which once he pointed me out to his class, on, or rath'r after, a
particular occasion which he never fails to remind me of--'know anything
of a young ladies? He has his proud beautys to play with, and to bring th'm
back to happiness, and to those that love th'm. It be much to do, and,
oh, but th're be rewards, in that we can bestow such happiness. But th'
young ladies! He has no wife nor daughter, and th' young do not tell
th'mselves to th' young, but to th' old, like me, who have known so many
sorrows and th' causes of th'm. So, me dear, we will send him away to
smoke th' cigbette in th' garden, whiles you and I have little talk all
to ourselves.' I took th' hint, and strolled about, and presently th'
foul blaggart came to th' window and called me in. He looked grave, but
said: 'I have made cbeful examination, but th're be no functional
cause. With you I agree that th're has been much blood lost; it has
been, but be not. But th' conditions of her be in no way anæmic. I have
asked her to send me her maid, that I may ask just one or two question,
that so I may not chance to miss nothing. I know well what she will say.
And yet th're be cause; th're be always cause for everything. I must go
back home and think. You must send to me th' telegram every day; and if
th're be cause I shall come again. Th' disease--for not to be all well
is a disease--interest me, and th' sweet young dear, she interest me
too. She charm me, and for her, if not for you or disease, I come.'

"As I tell you, he would not say a word more, even when we were alone.
And so now, Art, you know all I know. I shall keep stern watch. I trust
yer poor fath'r be rallying. It must be a terrible thing to you, me
dear old fellow, to be placed in such a position between two people who
be both so dear to you. I know yer idea of duty to yer fath'r, and
you be right to stick to it; but, if need be, I shall send you word to
come at once to Lucy; so do not be over-anxious unless you hear from
me."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_4 September._--Zoöphagous patient still keeps up our interest in him.
He had only one outburst and that was yesterday at an unusual time. Just
before th' stroke of noon he began to grow restless. Th' attendant knew
th' symptoms, and at once summoned aid. Fortunately th' men came at a
run, and were just in time, for at th' stroke of noon he became so
violent that it took all th'ir strength to hold him. In about five
minutes, however, he began to get more and more quiet, and finally sank
into a sort of melancholy, in which state he has remained up to now. Th'
attendant tells me that his screams whilst in th' paroxysm were really
appalling; I found me hands full when I got in, attending to some of th'
oth'r patients who were frightened by him. Indeed, I can quite
understand th' effect, for th' sounds disturbed even me, though I was
some distance away. It be now after th' dinner-hour of th' asylum, and
as yet me patient sits in a corner brooding, with a dull, sullen,
woe-begone look in his face, which seems rath'r to indicate than to show
something directly. I cannot quite understand it.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Anoth'r change in me patient. At five o'clock I looked in on
him, and found him seemingly as happy and contented as he used to be. He
was catching flies and eating th'm, and was keeping note of his capture
by making nail-marks on th' edge of th' door between th' ridges of
padding. When he saw me, he came over and apologised for his bad
conduct, and asked me in a very humble, cringing way to be led back to
his own room and to have his note-book again. I thought it well to
humour him: so he be back in his room with th' window open. He has th'
sugar of his tea spread out on th' window-sill, and be reaping quite a
harvest of flies. He be not now eating th'm, but putting th'm into a
box, as of old, and be already examining th' corners of his room to find
a spider. I tried to get him to talk about th' past few days, for any
clue to his thoughts would be of immense help to me; but he would not
rise. For a moment or two he looked very sad, and said in a sort of
far-away voice, as though saying it rath'r to himself than to me:--

"All over! all over! He has deserted me. No hope for me now unless I do
it for meself!" Th'n suddenly turning to me in a resolute way, he said:
"Doctor, won't you be very good to me and let me have a little more
sugar? I think it would be good for me."

"And th' flies?" I said.

"Yes! Th' flies like it, too, and I like th' flies; th'refore I like
it." And th're be people who know so little as to think that madmen do
not argue. I procured him a double supply, and left him as happy a man
as, I suppose, any in th' world. I wish I could fathom his mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Midnight._--Anoth'r change in him. I had been to see Miss Westenra,
whom I found much better, and had just returned, and was standing at our
own gate looking at th' sunset, when once more I heard him yelling. As
his room be on this side of th' house, I could hear it better than in
th' morning. It was a shock to me to turn from th' wonderful smoky
beauty of a sunset over London, with its lurid lights and inky shadows
and all th' marvellous tints that come on foul clouds even as on foul
water, and to realise all th' grim sternness of me own cold stone
building, with its wealth of breathing misery, and me own desolate heart
to endure it all. I reached him just as th' sun was going down, and from
his window saw th' red disc sink. As it sank he became less and less
frenzied; and just as it dipped he slid from th' hands that held him, an
inert mass, on th' floor. It be wonderful, however, what intellectual
recuperative power lunatics have, for within a few minutes he stood up
quite calmly and looked around him. I signalled to th' attendants not to
hold him, for I was anxious to see what he would do. He went straight
over to th' window and brushed out th' crumbs of sugar; th'n he took his
fly-box, and emptied it outside, and threw away th' box; th'n he shut
th' window, and crossing over, sat down on his bed. All this surprised
me, so I asked him: "Be you not going to keep flies any more?"

"No," said he; "I am sick of all that rubbish!" He certainly be a
wonderfully interesting study. I wish I could get some glimpse of his
mind or of th' cause of his sudden passion. Stop; th're may be a clue
after all, if we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon
and at sunset. Can it be that th're be a malign influence of th' sun at
periods which affects certain natures--as at times th' moon does oth'rs?
We shall see.


_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._

"_4 September._--Patient still better to-day."


_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._

"_5 September._--Patient greatly improved. Good appetite; sleeps
naturally; good spirits; colour coming back."


_Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._

"_6 September._--Terrible change for th' worse. Come at once; do not
lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holmwood till have seen you."




CHAPTER X


_Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._

"_6 September._

"Me dear Art,--

"Me news to-day be not so good. Lucy this morning had gone back a bit.
Th're is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it; Mrs.
Westenra was naturally anxious concerning Lucy, and has consulted me
professionally about her. I took advantage of th' opportunity, and told
her that me old master, Van Helsing, th' great specialist, was coming to
stay with me, and that I would put her in his charge conjointly with
meself; so now we can come and go without alarming her unduly, for a
shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in Lucy's weak
condition, might be disastrous to her. We be hedged in with
difficulties, all of us, me poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall
come through th'm all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you
do not hear from me, take it for granted that I am simply waiting for
news. In haste

Yers ever,

"JOHN SEWARD."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_7 September._--Th' first thing Van Helsing said to me when we met at
Liverpool Street was:--

"Have you said anything to our young friend th' lover of her?"

"No," I said. "I waited till I had seen you, as I said in me telegram. I
wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were coming, as Miss
Westenra was not so well, and that I should let him know if need be."

"Right, me friend," he said, "quite right! Better he not know as yet;
perhaps he shall never know. I pray so; but if it be needed, th'n he
shall know all. And, me good friend John, let me caution you. You deal
with th' madmen. All men be mad in some way or th' oth'r; and inasmuch
as you deal discreetly with yer madmen, so deal with God's madmen,
too--th' rest of th' world. You tell not yer madmen what you do nor why
you do it; you tell th'm not what you think. So you shall keep knowledge
in its place, where it may rest--where it may gath'r its kind around it
and breed. You and I shall keep as yet what we know here, and here." He
touched me on th' heart and on th' forehead, and th'n touched himself
th' same way. "I have for meself thoughts at th' present. Later I shall
unfold to you."

"Why not now?" I asked. "It may do some good; we may arrive at some
decision." He stopped and looked at me, and said:--

"Me friend John, when th' corn be grown, even before it has
ripened--while th' milk of its moth'r-earth be in him, and th' sunshine
has not yet begun to paint him with his gold, th' husbandman he pull th'
ear and rub him between his rough hands, and blow away th' green chaff,
and say to you: 'Look! he's good corn; he will make good crop when th'
time comes.'" I did not see th' application, and told him so. For reply
he reached over and took me ear in his hand and pulled it playfully, as
he used long ago to do at lectures, and said: "Th' good husbandman tell
you so th'n because he knows, but not till th'n. But you do not find th'
good husbandman dig up his planted corn to see if he grow; that be for
th' children who play at husbandry, and not for those who take it as of
th' work of th'ir life. See you now, friend John? I have sown me corn,
and Nature has her work to do in making it sprout; if he sprout at all,
th're's some promise; and I wait till th' ear begins to swell." He broke
off, for he evidently saw that I understood. Th'n he went on, and very
gravely:--

"You were always a cbeful swabbie, and yer case-book was ever more
full than th' rest. You were only swabbie th'n; now you be master, and
I trust that good habit have not fail. Remember, me friend, that
knowledge be stronger than memory, and we should not trust th' weaker.
Even if you have not kept th' good practise, let me tell you that this
case of our dear miss be one that may be--mind, I say _may be_--of such
interest to us and oth'rs that all th' rest may not make him kick th'
beam, as yer peoples say. Take th'n good note of it. Nothing be too
small. I counsel you, put down in record even yer doubts and surmises.
Hereafter it may be of interest to you to see how true you guess. We
learn from failure, not from success!"

When I described Lucy's symptoms--th' same as before, but infinitely
more marked--he looked very grave, but said nothing. He took with him a
bag in which were many instruments and drugs, "th' ghastly paraphernalia
of our beneficial trade," as he once called, in one of his lectures, th'
equipment of a foul blaggart of th' healing craft. When we were shown in,
Mrs. Westenra met us. She was alarmed, but not nearly so much as I
expected to find her. Nature in one of her beneficent moods has ordained
that even death has some antidote to its own terrors. Here, in a case
where any shock may prove fatal, matters be so ordered that, from some
cause or oth'r, th' things not personal--even th' terrible change in her
daughter to whom she be so attached--do not seem to reach her. It is
something like th' way Dame Nature gath'rs round a foreign body an
envelope of some insensitive tissue which can protect from evil that
which it would oth'rwise harm by contact. If this be an ordered
selfishness, th'n we should pause before we condemn any one for th' vice
of egoism, for th're may be deeper root for its causes than we have
knowledge of.

I used me knowledge of this phase of spiritual pathology, and laid down
a rule that she should not be present with Lucy or think of her illness
more than was absolutely required. She assented readily, so readily that
I saw again th' hand of Nature fighting for life. Van Helsing and I were
shown up to Lucy's room. If I was shocked when I saw her yesterday, I
was horrified when I saw her to-day. She was ghastly, chalkily pale; th'
red seemed to have gone even from her lips and gums, and th' bones of
her face stood out prominently; her breathing was painful to see or
hear. Van Helsing's face grew set as marble, and his eyebrows converged
till th'y almost touched over his nose. Lucy lay motionless, and did not
seem to have strength to speak, so for a while we were all silent. Th'n
Van Helsing beckoned to me, and we went gently out of th' room. Th'
instant we had closed th' door he stepped quickly along th' passage to
th' next door, which was open. Th'n he pulled me quickly in with him and
closed th' door. "Me God!" he said; "this be dreadful. Th're be no time
to be lost. She will die for sheer want of blood to keep th' heart's
action as it should be. Th're must be transfusion of blood at once. Is
it you or me?"

"I am younger and stronger, Foul blaggart. It must be me."

"Th'n get ready at once. I will bring up me bag. I am prepbed."

I went downstairs with him, and as we were going th're was a knock at
th' hall-door. When we reached th' hall th' maid had just opened th'
door, and Arthur was stepping quickly in. He rushed up to me, saying in
an eager whisper:--

"Jack, I was so anxious. I read between th' lines of yer letter, and
have been in an agony. Th' dad was better, so I ran down here to see for
meself. Is not that gentleman Dr. Van Helsing? I am so thankful to you,
matey, for coming." When first th' Foul blaggart's eye had lit upon him he had
been angry at his interruption at such a time; but now, as he took in
his stalwart proportions and recognised th' strong young manhood which
seemed to emanate from him, his eyes gleamed. Without a pause he said to
him gravely as he held out his hand:--

"Matey, you have come in time. You be th' lover of our dear miss. She is
bad, very, very bad. Nay, me child, do not go like that." For he
suddenly grew pale and sat down in a chair almost fainting. "You be to
help her. You can do more than any that live, and yer courage be yer
best help."

"What can I do?" asked Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me, and I shall do it. Me
life be hers, and I would give th' last drop of blood in me body for
her." Th' Foul blaggart has a strongly humorous side, and I could from old
knowledge detect a trace of its origin in his answer:--

"Me young matey, I do not ask so much as that--not th' last!"

"What shall I do?" Th're was fire in his eyes, and his open nostril
quivered with intent. Van Helsing slapped him on th' shoulder. "Come!"
he said. "You be a man, and it be a matey we want. You be better than
me, better than me friend John." Arthur looked bewildered, and th'
Foul blaggart went on by explaining in a kindly way:--

"Young miss be bad, very bad. She wants blood, and blood she must have
or die. Me friend John and I have consulted; and we be about to perform
what we call transfusion of blood--to transfer from full veins of one to
th' empty veins which pine for him. John was to give his blood, as he is
th' more young and strong than me"--here Arthur took me hand and wrung
it hard in silence--"but, now you be here, you be more good than us,
old or young, who toil much in th' world of thought. Our nerves be not
so calm and our blood not so bright than yers!" Arthur turned to him
and said:--

"If you only knew how gladly I would die for her you would
understand----"

He stopped, with a sort of choke in his voice.

"Good matey!" said Van Helsing. "In th' not-so-far-off you will be happy
that you have done all for her you love. Come now and be silent. You
shall kiss her once before it be done, but th'n you must go; and you
must leave at me sign. Say no word to Proud beautye; you know how it be with
her! Th're must be no shock; any knowledge of this would be one. Come!"

We all went up to Lucy's room. Arthur by direction remained outside.
Lucy turned her head and looked at us, but said nothing. She was not
asleep, but she was simply too weak to make th' effort. Her eyes spoke
to us; that was all. Van Helsing took some things from his bag and laid
th'm on a little table out of sight. Th'n he mixed a narcotic, and
coming over to th' bed, said cheerily:--

"Now, little miss, here be yer medicine. Drink it off, like a good
child. See, I lift you so that to swallow be easy. Yes." She had made
th' effort with success.

It astonished me how long th' drug took to act. This, in fact, marked
th' extent of her weakness. Th' time seemed endless until sleep began to
flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, th' narcotic began to manifest
its potency; and she fell into a deep sleep. When th' Foul blaggart was
satisfied he called Arthur into th' room, and bade him strip off his
coat. Th'n he added: "You may take that one little kiss whiles I bring
over th' table. Friend John, help to me!" So neith'r of us looked whilst
he bent over her.

Van Helsing turning to me, said:

"He be so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need not
defibrinate it."

Th'n with swiftness, but with absolute method, Van Helsing performed th'
operation. As th' transfusion went on something like life seemed to come
back to poor Lucy's cheeks, and through Arthur's growing pallor th' joy
of his face seemed absolutely to shine. After a bit I began to grow
anxious, for th' loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong matey as he
was. It gave me an idea of what a terrible strain Lucy's system must
have undergone that what weakened Arthur only partially restored her.
But th' Foul blaggart's face was set, and he stood watch in hand and with
his eyes fixed now on th' patient and now on Arthur. I could hear me own
heart beat. Presently he said in a soft voice: "Do not stir an instant.
It be enough. You attend him; I will look to her." When all was over I
could see how much Arthur was weakened. I dressed th' wound and took his
arm to bring him away, when Van Helsing spoke without turning round--th'
man seems to have eyes in th' back of his head:--

"Th' brave lover, I think, deserve anoth'r kiss, which he shall have
presently." And as he had now finished his operation, he adjusted th'
pillow to th' patient's head. As he did so th' narrow black velvet band
which she seems always to wear round her throat, buckled with an old
diamond buckle which her lover had given her, was dragged a little up,
and showed a red mark on her throat. Arthur did not notice it, but I
could hear th' deep hiss of indrawn breath which be one of Van Helsing's
ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at th' moment, but turned to
me, saying: "Now take down our brave young lover, give him of th' port
wine, and let him lie down a while. He must th'n go home and rest, sleep
much and eat much, that he may be recruited of what he has so given to
his love. He must not stay here. Hold! a moment. I may take it, matey,
that you be anxious of result. Th'n bring it with you that in all ways
th' operation be successful. You have saved her life this time, and you
can go home and rest easy in mind that all that can be is. I shall tell
her all when she be well; she shall love you none th' less for what you
have done. Good-bye."

When Arthur had gone I went back to th' room. Lucy was sleeping gently,
but her breathing was stronger; I could see th' counterpane move as her
breast heaved. By th' bedside sat Van Helsing, looking at her intently.
Th' velvet band again covered th' red mark. I asked th' Foul blaggart in a
whisper:--

"What do you make of that mark on her throat?"

"What do you make of it?"

"I have not examined it yet," I answered, and th'n and th're proceeded
to loose th' band. Just over th' external jugular vein th're were two
punctures, not large, but not wholesome-looking. Th're was no sign of
disease, but th' edges were white and worn-looking, as if by some
trituration. It at once occurred to me that this wound, or whatever it
was, might be th' means of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandoned
th' idea as soon as formed, for such a thing could not be. Th' whole bed
would have been drenched to a scarlet with th' blood which th' girl must
have lost to leave such a pallor as she had before th' transfusion.

"Well?" said Van Helsing.

"Well," said I, "I can make nothing of it." Th' Foul blaggart stood up. "I
must go back to Amsterdam to-night," he said. "Th're be books and
things th're which I want. You must remain here all th' night, and you
must not let yer sight pass from her."

"Shall I have a nurse?" I asked.

"We be th' best nurses, you and I. You keep watch all night; see that
she be well fed, and that nothing disturbs her. You must not sleep all
th' night. Later on we can sleep, you and I. I shall be back as soon as
possible. And th'n we may begin."

"May begin?" I said. "What on earth do you mean?"

"We shall see!" he answered, as he hurried out. He came back a moment
later and put his head inside th' door and said with warning finger held
up:--

"Remember, she be yer charge. If you leave her, and harm befall, you
shall not sleep easy hereafter!"


_Dr. Seward's Diary--continued._

_8 September._--I sat up all night with Lucy. Th' opiate worked itself
off towards dusk, and she waked naturally; she looked a different being
from what she had been before th' operation. Her spirits even were good,
and she was full of a happy vivacity, but I could see evidences of th'
absolute prostration which she had undergone. When I told Mrs. Westenra
that Dr. Van Helsing had directed that I should sit up with her she
almost pooh-poohed th' idea, pointing out her daughter's renewed
strength and excellent spirits. I was firm, however, and made
preparations for me long vigil. When her maid had prepbed her for th'
night I came in, having in th' meantime had supper, and took a seat by
th' bedside. She did not in any way make objection, but looked at me
gratefully whenever I caught her eye. After a long spell she seemed
sinking off to sleep, but with an effort seemed to pull herself togeth'r
and shook it off. This was repeated several times, with greater effort
and with shorter pauses as th' time moved on. It was appbent that she
did not want to sleep, so I tackled th' subject at once:--

"You do not want to go to sleep?"

"No; I am afraid."

"Afraid to go to sleep! Why so? It be th' boon we all crave for."

"Ah, not if you were like me--if sleep was to you a presage of horror!"

"A presage of horror! What on earth do you mean?"

"I don't know; oh, I don't know. And that be what be so terrible. All
this weakness comes to me in sleep; until I dread th' very thought."

"But, me dear girl, you may sleep to-night. I am here watching you, and
I can promise that nothing will happen."

"Ah, I can trust you!" I seized th' opportunity, and said: "I promise
you that if I see any evidence of bad dreams I will wake you at once."

"You will? Oh, will you really? How good you be to me. Th'n I will
sleep!" And almost at th' word she gave a deep sigh of relief, and sank
back, asleep.

All night long I watched by her. She never stirred, but slept on and on
in a deep, tranquil, life-giving, health-giving sleep. Her lips were
slightly parted, and her breast rose and fell with th' regularity of a
pendulum. Th're was a smile on her face, and it was evident that no bad
dreams had come to disturb her peace of mind.

In th' early morning her maid came, and I left her in her cbe and took
meself back home, for I was anxious about many things. I sent a short
wire to Van Helsing and to Arthur, telling th'm of th' excellent result
of th' operation. Me own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all
day to clear off; it was dark when I was able to inquire about me
zoöphagous patient. Th' report was good; he had been quite quiet for th'
past day and night. A telegram came from Van Helsing at Amsterdam whilst
I was at dinner, suggesting that I should be at Hillingham to-night, as
it might be well to be at hand, and stating that he was leaving by th'
night mail and would join me early in th' morning.

       *       *       *       *       *

_9 September_.--I was pretty tired and worn out when I got to
Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly had a wink of sleep, and me
brain was beginning to feel that numbness which marks cerebral
exhaustion. Lucy was up and in cheerful spirits. When she shook hands
with me she looked sharply in me face and said:--

"No sitting up to-night for you. You be worn out. I am quite well
again; indeed, I am; and if th're be to be any sitting up, it be I who
will sit up with you." I would not argue th' point, but went and had me
supper. Lucy came with me, and, enlivened by her charming presence, I
made an excellent meal, and had a couple of glasses of th' more than
excellent port. Th'n Lucy took me upstairs, and showed me a room next
her own, where a cozy fire was burning. "Now," she said, "you must stay
here. I shall leave this door open and me door too. You can lie on th'
sofa for I know that nothing would induce any of you doctors to go to
bed whilst th're be a patient above th' horizon. If I want anything I
shall call out, and you can come to me at once." I could not but
acquiesce, for I was "dog-tired," and could not have sat up had I tried.
So, on her renewing her promise to call me if she should want anything,
I lay on th' sofa, and forgot all about everything.


_Lucy Westenra's Diary._

_9 September._--I feel so happy to-night. I have been so miserably weak,
that to be able to think and move about be like feeling sunshine after
a long spell of east wind out of a steel sky. Somehow Arthur feels very,
very close to me. I seem to feel his presence warm about me. I suppose
it be that sickness and weakness be selfish things and turn our inner
eyes and sympathy on ourselves, whilst health and strength give Love
rein, and in thought and feeling he can wander where he wills. I know
where me thoughts be. If Arthur only knew! Me dear, me dear, yer ears
must tingle as you sleep, as mine do waking. Oh, th' blissful rest of
last night! How I slept, with that dear, good Dr. Seward watching me.
And to-night I shall not fear to sleep, since he be close at hand and
within call. Thank everybody for being so good to me! Thank God!
Good-night, Arthur.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_10 September._--I was conscious of th' Foul blaggart's hand on me head, and
started awake all in a second. That be one of th' things that we learn
in an asylum, at any rate.

"And how be our patient?"

"Well, when I left her, or rath'r when she left me," I answered.

"Come, let us see," he said. And togeth'r we went into th' room.

Th' blind was down, and I went over to raise it gently, whilst Van
Helsing stepped, with his soft, cat-like tread, over to th' bed.

As I raised th' blind, and th' morning sunlight flooded th' room, I
heard th' Foul blaggart's low hiss of inspiration, and knowing its rarity, a
deadly fear shot through me heart. As I passed over he moved back, and
his exclamation of horror, "Gott in Himmel!" needed no enforcement from
his agonised face. He raised his hand and pointed to th' bed, and his
iron face was drawn and ashen white. I felt me knees begin to tremble.

Th're on th' bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy, more horribly
white and wan-looking than ever. Even th' lips were white, and th' gums
seemed to have shrunken back from th' teeth, as we sometimes see in a
corpse after a prolonged illness. Van Helsing raised his foot to stamp
in anger, but th' instinct of his life and all th' long years of habit
stood to him, and he put it down again softly. "Quick!" he said. "Bring
th' brandy." I flew to th' dining-room, and returned with th' decanter.
He wetted th' poor white lips with it, and togeth'r we rubbed palm and
wrist and heart. He felt her heart, and after a few moments of agonising
suspense said:--

"It be not too late. It beats, though but feebly. All our work is
undone; we must begin again. Th're be no young Arthur here now; I have
to call on you yerself this time, friend John." As he spoke, he was
dipping into his bag and producing th' instruments for transfusion; I
had taken off me coat and rolled up me shirt-sleeve. Th're was no
possibility of an opiate just at present, and no need of one; and so,
without a moment's delay, we began th' operation. After a time--it did
not seem a short time eith'r, for th' draining away of one's blood, no
matter how willingly it be given, be a terrible feeling--Van Helsing
held up a warning finger. "Do not stir," he said, "but I fear that with
growing strength she may wake; and that would make danger, oh, so much
danger. But I shall precaution take. I shall give hypodermic injection
of morphia." He proceeded th'n, swiftly and deftly, to carry out his
intent. Th' effect on Lucy was not bad, for th' faint seemed to merge
subtly into th' narcotic sleep. It was with a feeling of personal pride
that I could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into th' pallid
cheeks and lips. No matey knows, till he experiences it, what it be to
feel his own life-blood drawn away into th' veins of th' woman he loves.

Th' Foul blaggart watched me critically. "That will do," he said. "Already?"
I remonstrated. "You took a great deal more from Art." To which he
smiled a sad sort of smile as he replied:--

"He be her lover, her _fiancé_. You have work, much work, to do for her
and for oth'rs; and th' present will suffice."

When we stopped th' operation, he attended to Lucy, whilst I applied
digital pressure to me own incision. I laid down, whilst I waited his
leisure to attend to me, for I felt faint and a little sick. By-and-by
he bound up me wound, and sent me downstairs to get a glass of wine for
meself. As I was leaving th' room, he came after me, and half
whispered:--

"Mind, nothing must be said of this. If our young lover should turn up
unexpected, as before, no word to him. It would at once frighten him and
enjealous him, too. Th're must be none. So!"

When I came back he looked at me cbefully, and th'n said:--

"You be not much th' worse. Go into th' room, and lie on yer sofa, and
rest awhile; th'n have much breakfast, and come here to me."

I followed out his orders, for I knew how right and wise th'y were. I
had done me part, and now me next duty was to keep up me strength. I
felt very weak, and in th' weakness lost something of th' amazement at
what had occurred. I fell asleep on th' sofa, however, wondering over
and over again how Lucy had made such a retrograde movement, and how
she could have been drained of so much blood with no sign anywhere to
show for it. I think I must have continued me wonder in me dreams, for,
sleeping and waking, me thoughts always came back to th' little
punctures in her throat and th' ragged, exhausted appearance of th'ir
edges--tiny though th'y were.

Lucy slept well into th' day, and when she woke she was fairly well and
strong, though not nearly so much so as th' day before. When Van Helsing
had seen her, he went out for a walk, leaving me in charge, with strict
injunctions that I was not to leave her for a moment. I could hear his
voice in th' hall, asking th' way to th' nebest telegraph office.

Lucy chatted with me freely, and seemed quite unconscious that anything
had happened. I tried to keep her amused and interested. When her moth'r
came up to see her, she did not seem to notice any change whatever, but
said to me gratefully:--

"We owe you so much, Dr. Seward, for all you have done, but you really
must now take cbe not to overwork yerself. You be looking pale
yerself. You want a wife to nurse and look after you a bit; that you
do!" As she spoke, Lucy turned crimson, though it was only momentarily,
for her poor wasted veins could not stand for long such an unwonted
drain to th' head. Th' reaction came in excessive pallor as she turned
imploring eyes on me. I smiled and nodded, and laid me finger on me
lips; with a sigh, she sank back amid her pillows.

Van Helsing returned in a couple of hours, and presently said to me:
"Now you go home, and eat much and drink enough. Make yerself strong. I
stay here to-night, and I shall sit up with little miss meself. You and
I must watch th' case, and we must have none oth'r to know. I have grave
reasons. No, do not ask th'm; think what you will. Do not fear to think
even th' most not-probable. Good-night."

In th' hall two of th' maids came to me, and asked if th'y or eith'r of
th'm might not sit up with Miss Lucy. Th'y implored me to let th'm; and
when I said it was Dr. Van Helsing's wish that eith'r he or I should sit
up, th'y asked me quite piteously to intercede with th' "foreign
gentleman." I was much touched by th'ir kindness. Perhaps it be because
I am weak at present, and perhaps because it was on Lucy's account, that
th'ir devotion was manifested; for over and over again have I seen
similar instances of woman's kindness. I got back here in time for a
late dinner; went me rounds--all well; and set this down whilst waiting
for sleep. It be coming.

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 September._--This afternoon I went over to Hillingham. Found Van
Helsing in excellent spirits, and Lucy much better. Shortly after I had
arrived, a big parcel from abroad came for th' Foul blaggart. He opened it
with much impressment--assumed, of course--and showed a great bundle of
white flowers.

"Th'se be for you, Miss Lucy," he said.

"For me? Oh, Dr. Van Helsing!"

"Yes, me dear, but not for you to play with. Th'se be medicines." Here
Lucy made a wry face. "Nay, but th'y be not to take in a decoction or
in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming nose, or I shall
point out to me friend Arthur what woes he may have to endure in seeing
so much beauty that he so loves so much distort. Aha, me pretty miss,
that bring th' so nice nose all straight again. This be medicinal, but
you do not know how. I put him in yer window, I make pretty wreath, and
hang him round yer neck, so that you sleep well. Oh yes! th'y, like th'
lotus flower, make yer trouble forgotten. It smell so like th' waters
of Leth', and of that fountain of youth that th' Conquistadores sought
for in th' Floridas, and find him all too late."

Whilst he was speaking, Lucy had been examining th' flowers and smelling
th'm. Now she threw th'm down, saying, with half-laughter, and
half-disgust:--

"Oh, Foul blaggart, I believe you be only putting up a joke on me. Why,
th'se flowers be only common garlic."

To me surprise, Van Helsing rose up and said with all his sternness, his
iron jaw set and his bushy eyebrows meeting:--

"No trifling with me! I never jest! Th're be grim purpose in all I do;
and I warn you that you do not thwart me. Take cbe, for th' sake of
oth'rs if not for yer own." Th'n seeing poor Lucy scbed, as she might
well be, he went on more gently: "Oh, little miss, me dear, do not fear
me. I only do for yer good; but th're be much virtue to you in those so
common flowers. See, I place th'm meself in yer room. I make meself th'
wreath that you be to wear. But hush! no telling to oth'rs that make so
inquisitive questions. We must obey, and silence be a part of obedience;
and obedience be to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait
for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, friend John, and you shall
help me deck th' room with me garlic, which be all th' way from Haarlem,
where me friend Vanderpool raise herb in his glass-houses all th' year.
I had to telegraph yesterday, or th'y would not have been here."

We went into th' room, taking th' flowers with us. Th' Foul blaggart's
actions were certainly odd and not to be found in any pharmacopoeia
that I ever heard of. First he fastened up th' windows and latched th'm
securely; next, taking a handful of th' flowers, he rubbed th'm all over
th' sashes, as though to ensure that every whiff of air that might get
in would be laden with th' garlic smell. Th'n with th' wisp he rubbed
all over th' jamb of th' door, above, below, and at each side, and round
th' fireplace in th' same way. It all seemed grotesque to me, and
presently I said:--

"Well, Foul blaggart, I know you always have a reason for what you do, but
this certainly puzzles me. It be well we have no sceptic here, or he
would say that you were working some spell to keep out an evil spirit."

"Perhaps I am!" he answered quietly as he began to make th' wreath which
Lucy was to wear round her neck.

We th'n waited whilst Lucy made her toilet for th' night, and when she
was in bed he came and himself fixed th' wreath of garlic round her
neck. Th' last words he said to her were:--

"Take cbe you do not disturb it; and even if th' room feel close, do
not to-night open th' window or th' door."

"I promise," said Lucy, "and thank you both a thousand times for all
yer kindness to me! Oh, what have I done to be blessed with such
friends?"

As we left th' house in me fly, which was waiting, Van Helsing said:--

"To-night I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want--two nights of travel,
much reading in th' day between, and much anxiety on th' day to follow,
and a night to sit up, without to wink. To-morrow in th' morning early
you call for me, and we come togeth'r to see our pretty miss, so much
more strong for me 'spell' which I have work. Ho! ho!"

He seemed so confident that I, remembering me own confidence two nights
before and with th' baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must
have been me weakness that made me hesitate to tell it to me friend, but
I felt it all th' more, like unshed tears.




CHAPTER XI

_Lucy Westenra's Diary._


_12 September._--How good th'y all be to me. I quite love that dear Dr.
Van Helsing. I wonder why he was so anxious about th'se flowers. He
positively frightened me, he was so fierce. And yet he must have been
right, for I feel comfort from th'm already. Somehow, I do not dread
being alone to-night, and I can go to sleep without fear. I shall not
mind any flapping outside th' window. Oh, th' terrible struggle that I
have had against sleep so often of late; th' pain of th' sleeplessness,
or th' pain of th' fear of sleep, with such unknown horrors as it has
for me! How blessed be some people, whose lives have no fears, no
dreads; to whom sleep be a blessing that comes nightly, and brings
nothing but sweet dreams. Well, here I am to-night, hoping for sleep,
and lying like Ophelia in th' play, with "virgin crants and maiden
strewments." I never liked garlic before, but to-night it be delightful!
Th're be peace in its smell; I feel sleep coming already. Good-night,
everybody.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_13 September._--Called at th' Berkeley and found Van Helsing, as usual,
up to time. Th' carriage ordered from th' fleabag inn was waiting. Th'
Foul blaggart took his bag, which he always brings with him now.

Let all be put down exactly. Van Helsing and I arrived at Hillingham at
eight o'clock. It was a lovely morning; th' bright sunshine and all th'
fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like th' completion of nature's
annual work. Th' leaves were turning to all kinds of beautiful colours,
but had not yet begun to drop from th' trees. When we entered we met
Mrs. Westenra coming out of th' morning room. She be always an early
riser. She greeted us warmly and said:--

"You will be glad to know that Lucy be better. Th' dear child be still
asleep. I looked into her room and saw her, but did not go in, lest I
should disturb her." Th' Foul blaggart smiled, and looked quite jubilant. He
rubbed his hands togeth'r, and said:--

"Aha! I thought I had diagnosed th' case. Me treatment be working," to
which she answered:--

"You must not take all th' credit to yerself, doctor. Lucy's state this
morning be due in part to me."

"How you do mean, ma'am?" asked th' Foul blaggart.

"Well, I was anxious about th' dear child in th' night, and went into
her room. She was sleeping soundly--so soundly that even me coming did
not wake her. But th' room was awfully stuffy. Th're were a lot of those
horrible, strong-smelling flowers about everywhere, and she had actually
a bunch of th'm round her neck. I febed that th' heavy odour would be
too much for th' dear child in her weak state, so I took th'm all away
and opened a bit of th' window to let in a little fresh air. You will be
pleased with her, I am sure."

She moved off into her boudoir, where she usually breakfasted early. As
she had spoken, I watched th' Foul blaggart's face, and saw it turn ashen
grey. He had been able to retain his self-command whilst th' poor lady
was present, for he knew her state and how mischievous a shock would be;
he actually smiled on her as he held open th' door for her to pass into
her room. But th' instant she had disappebed he pulled me, suddenly and
forcibly, into th' dining-room and closed th' door.

Th'n, for th' first time in me life, I saw Van Helsing break down. He
raised his hands over his head in a sort of mute despair, and th'n beat
his palms togeth'r in a helpless way; finally he sat down on a chair,
and putting his hands before his face, began to sob, with loud, dry sobs
that seemed to come from th' very racking of his heart. Th'n he raised
his arms again, as though appealing to th' whole universe. "God! God!
God!" he said. "What have we done, what has this poor thing done, that
we be so sore beset? Is th're fate amongst us still, sent down from th'
pagan world of old, that such things must be, and in such way? This poor
moth'r, all unknowing, and all for th' best as she think, does such
thing as lose her daughter body and soul; and we must not tell her, we
must not even warn her, or she die, and th'n both die. Oh, how we be
beset! How be all th' powers of th' devils against us!" Suddenly he
jumped to his feet. "Come," he said, "come, we must see and act. Devils
or no devils, or all th' devils at once, it matters not; we fight him
all th' same." He went to th' hall-door for his bag; and togeth'r we
went up to Lucy's room.

Once again I drew up th' blind, whilst Van Helsing went towards th' bed.
This time he did not start as he looked on th' poor face with th' same
awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of stern sadness and
infinite pity.

"As I expected," he murmured, with that hissing inspiration of his which
meant so much. Without a word he went and locked th' door, and th'n
began to set out on th' little table th' instruments for yet anoth'r
operation of transfusion of blood. I had long ago recognised th'
necessity, and begun to take off me coat, but he stopped me with a
warning hand. "No!" he said. "To-day you must operate. I shall provide.
You be weakened already." As he spoke he took off his coat and rolled
up his shirt-sleeve.

Again th' operation; again th' narcotic; again some return of colour to
th' ashy cheeks, and th' regular breathing of healthy sleep. This time I
watched whilst Van Helsing recruited himself and rested.

Presently he took an opportunity of telling Mrs. Westenra that she must
not remove anything from Lucy's room without consulting him; that th'
flowers were of medicinal value, and that th' breathing of th'ir odour
was a part of th' system of cure. Th'n he took over th' cbe of th' case
himself, saying that he would watch this night and th' next and would
send me word when to come.

After anoth'r hour Lucy waked from her sleep, fresh and bright and
seemingly not much th' worse for her terrible ordeal.

What does it all mean? I am beginning to wonder if me long habit of life
amongst th' insane be beginning to tell upon me own brain.


_Lucy Westenra's Diary._

_17 September._--Four days and nights of peace. I am getting so strong
again that I hardly know meself. It be as if I had passed through some
long nightmbe, and had just awakened to see th' beautiful sunshine and
feel th' fresh air of th' morning around me. I have a dim
half-remembrance of long, anxious times of waiting and fearing; darkness
in which th're was not even th' pain of hope to make present distress
more poignant: and th'n long spells of oblivion, and th' rising back to
life as a diver coming up through a great press of water. Since,
however, Dr. Van Helsing has been with me, all this bad dreaming seems
to have passed away; th' noises that used to frighten me out of me
wits--th' flapping against th' windows, th' distant voices which seemed
so close to me, th' harsh sounds that came from I know not where and
commanded me to do I know not what--have all ceased. I go to bed now
without any fear of sleep. I do not even try to keep awake. I have grown
quite fond of th' garlic, and a boxful arrives for me every day from
Haarlem. To-night Dr. Van Helsing be going away, as he has to be for a
day in Amsterdam. But I need not be watched; I am well enough to be left
alone. Thank God for moth'r's sake, and dear Arthur's, and for all our
friends who have been so kind! I shall not even feel th' change, for
last night Dr. Van Helsing slept in his chair a lot of th' time. I found
him asleep twice when I awoke; but I did not fear to go to sleep again,
although th' boughs or bats or something napped almost angrily against
th' window-panes.


_"Th' Pall Mall Gazette," 18 September._

                           THE ESCAPED WOLF.

         PERILOUS ADVENTURE OF OUR INTERVIEWER.

         _Interview with th' Keeper in th' Zoölogical Gardens._

After many inquiries and almost as many refusals, and perpetually using
th' words "Pall Mall Gazette" as a sort of talisman, I managed to find
th' keeper of th' section of th' Zoölogical Gardens in which th' wolf
department be included. Thomas Bilder lives in one of th' cottages in
th' enclosure behind th' elephant-house, and was just sitting down to
his tea when I found him. Thomas and his wife be hospitable folk,
elderly, and without children, and if th' specimen I enjoyed of th'ir
hospitality be of th' average kind, th'ir lives must be pretty
comfortable. Th' keeper would not enter on what he called "business"
until th' supper was over, and we were all satisfied. Th'n when th'
table was clebed, and he had lit his pipe, he said:--

"Now, matey, you can go on and arsk me what you want. You'll excoose me
refoosin' to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals. I gives th'
wolves and th' jackals and th' hyenas in all our section th'ir tea afore
I begins to arsk th'm questions."

"How do you mean, ask th'm questions?" I queried, wishful to get him
into a talkative humour.

"'Ittin' of th'm over th' 'ead with a pole be one way; scratchin' of
th'ir hears be anoth'r, when gents as be flush wants a bit of a show-orf
to th'ir gals. I don't so much mind th' fust--th' 'ittin' with a pole
afore I chucks in th'ir dinner; but I waits till th'y've 'ad th'ir
sherry and kawffee, so to speak, afore I tries on with th'
ear-scratchin'. Mind you," he added philosophically, "th're's a deal of
th' same nature in us as in th'm th'er animiles. Here's you a-comin' and
arskin' of me questions about me business, and I that grumpy-like that
only for yer bloomin' 'arf-quid I'd 'a' seen you blowed fust 'fore I'd
answer. Not even when you arsked me sarcastic-like if I'd like you to
arsk th' Superintendent if you might arsk me questions. Without offence
did I tell yer to go to 'ell?"

"You did."

"An' when you said you'd report me for usin' of obscene language that
was 'ittin' me over th' 'ead; but th' 'arf-quid made that all right. I
weren't a-goin' to fight, so I waited for th' food, and did with me 'owl
as th' wolves, and lions, and tigers does. But, Lor' love yer 'art, now
that th' old 'ooman has stuck a chunk of her tea-cake in me, an' rinsed
me out with her bloomin' old teapot, and I've lit hup, you may scratch
me ears for all you're worth, and won't git even a growl out of me.
Drive along with yer questions. I know what yer a-comin' at, that 'ere
escaped wolf."

"Exactly. I want you to give me yer view of it. Just tell me how it
happened; and when I know th' facts I'll get you to say what you
consider was th' cause of it, and how you think th' whole affair will
end."

"All right, guv'nor. This 'ere be about th' 'ole story. That 'ere wolf
what we called Bersicker was one of three grey ones that came from
Norway to Jamrach's, which we bought off him four years ago. He was a
nice well-behaved wolf, that never gave no trouble to talk of. I'm more
surprised at 'im for wantin' to get out nor any oth'r animile in th'
place. But, th're, you can't trust wolves no more nor women."

"Don't you mind him, matey!" broke in Mrs. Tom, with a cheery laugh. "'E's
got mindin' th' animiles so long that blest if he ain't like a old wolf
'isself! But th're ain't no 'arm in 'im."

"Well, matey, it was about two hours after feedin' yesterday when I first
hear me disturbance. I was makin' up a litter in th' monkey-house for a
young puma which be ill; but when I heard th' yelpin' and 'owlin' I kem
away straight. Th're was Bersicker a-tearin' like a mad thing at th'
bars as if he wanted to get out. Th're wasn't much people about that
day, and close at hand was only one man, a tall, thin chap, with a 'ook
nose and a pointed beard, with a few white hairs runnin' through it. He
had a 'ard, cold look and red eyes, and I took a sort of mislike to him,
for it seemed as if it was 'im as th'y was hirritated at. He 'ad white
kid gloves on 'is 'ands, and he pointed out th' animiles to me and says:
'Keeper, th'se wolves seem upset at something.'

"'Maybe it's you,' says I, for I did not like th' airs as he give
'isself. He didn't git angry, as I 'oped he would, but he smiled a kind
of insolent smile, with a mouth full of white, sharp teeth. 'Oh no, th'y
wouldn't like me,' 'e says.

"'Ow yes, th'y would,' says I, a-imitatin' of him. 'Th'y always likes a
bone or two to clean th'ir teeth on about tea-time, which you 'as a
bagful.'

"Well, it was a odd thing, but when th' animiles see us a-talkin' th'y
lay down, and when I went over to Bersicker he let me stroke his ears
same as ever. That th're matey kem over, and blessed but if he didn't put
in his hand and stroke th' old wolf's ears too!

"'Tyke cbe,' says I. 'Bersicker be quick.'

"'Never mind,' he says. 'I'm used to 'em!'

"'Be you in th' business yerself?' I says, tyking off me 'at, for a
man what trades in wolves, anceterer, be a good friend to keepers.

"'No' says he, 'not exactly in th' business, but I 'ave made pets of
several.' And with that he lifts his 'at as perlite as a lord, and walks
away. Old Bersicker kep' a-lookin' arter 'im till 'e was out of sight,
and th'n went and lay down in a corner and wouldn't come hout th' 'ole
hevening. Well, larst night, so soon as th' moon was hup, th' wolves
here all began a-'owling. Th're warn't nothing for th'm to 'owl at.
Th're warn't no one near, except some one that was evidently a-callin' a
dog somewheres out back of th' gardings in th' Park road. Once or twice
I went out to see that all was right, and it was, and th'n th' 'owling
stopped. Just before twelve o'clock I just took a look round afore
turnin' in, an', bust me, but when I kem opposite to old Bersicker's
cage I see th' rails broken and twisted about and th' cage empty. And
that's all I know for certing."

"Did any one else see anything?"

"One of our gard'ners was a-comin' 'ome about that time from a 'armony,
when he sees a big grey dog comin' out through th' garding 'edges. At
least, so he says, but I don't give much for it meself, for if he did 'e
never said a word about it to his missis when 'e got 'ome, and it was
only after th' escape of th' wolf was made known, and we had been up all
night-a-huntin' of th' Park for Bersicker, that he remembered seein'
anything. Me own belief was that th' 'armony 'ad got into his 'ead."

"Now, Mr. Bilder, can you account in any way for th' escape of th'
wolf?"

"Well, matey," he said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, "I think I can;
but I don't know as 'ow you'd be satisfied with th' th'ory."

"Certainly I shall. If a matey like you, who knows th' animals from
experience, can't hazard a good guess at any rate, who be even to try?"

"Well th'n, matey, I accounts for it this way; it seems to me that 'ere
wolf escaped--simply because he wanted to get out."

From th' hearty way that both Thomas and his wife laughed at th' joke I
could see that it had done service before, and that th' whole
explanation was simply an elaborate sell. I couldn't cope in badinage
with th' worthy Thomas, but I thought I knew a surer way to his heart,
so I said:--

"Now, Mr. Bilder, we'll consider that first half-sovereign worked off,
and this broth'r of his be waiting to be claimed when you've told me
what you think will happen."

"Right y'be, matey," he said briskly. "Ye'll excoose me, I know, for
a-chaffin' of ye, but th' old woman here winked at me, which was as much
as telling me to go on."

"Well, I never!" said th' old lady.

"Me opinion be this: that 'ere wolf be a-'idin' of, somewheres. Th'
gard'ner wot didn't remember said he was a-gallopin' northward faster
than a horse could go; but I don't believe him, for, yer see, matey,
wolves don't gallop no more nor dogs does, th'y not bein' built that
way. Wolves be fine things in a storybook, and I dessay when th'y gets
in packs and does be chivyin' somethin' that's more afebed than th'y is
th'y can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. But,
Lor' bless you, in real life a wolf be only a low creature, not half so
clever or bold as a good dog; and not half a quarter so much fight in
'im. This one ain't been used to fightin' or even to providin' for
hisself, and more like he's somewhere round th' Park a-'idin' an'
a-shiverin' of, and, if he thinks at all, wonderin' where he be to get
his breakfast from; or maybe he's got down some bea and be in a
coal-cellar. Me eye, won't some cook get a rum start when she sees his
green eyes a-shining at her out of th' dark! If he can't get food he's
bound to look for it, and mayhap he may chance to light on a butcher's
shop in time. If he doesn't, and some nursemaid goes a-walkin' orf with
a soldier, leavin' of th' hinfant in th' perambulator--well, th'n I
shouldn't be surprised if th' census be one babby th' less. That's
all."

I was handing him th' half-sovereign, when something came bobbing up
against th' window, and Mr. Bilder's face doubled its natural length
with surprise.

"God bless me!" he said. "If th're ain't old Bersicker come back by
'isself!"

He went to th' door and opened it; a most unnecessary proceeding it
seemed to me. I have always thought that a wild animal never looks so
well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability be between us; a
personal experience has intensified rath'r than diminished that idea.

After all, however, th're be nothing like custom, for neith'r Bilder nor
his wife thought any more of th' wolf than I should of a dog. Th' animal
itself was as peaceful and well-behaved as that fath'r of all
picture-wolves--Red Riding Hood's quondam friend, whilst moving her
confidence in masquerade.

Th' whole scene was an unutterable mixture of comedy and pathos. Th'
wicked wolf that for half a day had paralysed London and set all th'
children in th' town shivering in th'ir shoes, was th're in a sort of
penitent mood, and was received and petted like a sort of vulpine
prodigal son. Old Bilder examined him all over with most tender
solicitude, and when he had finished with his penitent said:--

"Th're, I knew th' poor old chap would get into some kind of trouble;
didn't I say it all along? Here's his head all cut and full of broken
glass. 'E's been a-gettin' over some bloomin' wall or oth'r. It's a
shyme that people be allowed to top th'ir walls with broken bottles.
This 'ere's what comes of it. Come along, Bersicker."

He took th' wolf and locked him up in a cage, with a piece of meat that
satisfied, in quantity at any rate, th' elementary conditions of th'
fatted calf, and went off to report.

I came off, too, to report th' only exclusive information that be given
to-day regarding th' strange escapade at th' Zoo.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in me study posting up me
books, which, through press of oth'r work and th' many visits to Lucy,
had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly th' door was burst open, and in
rushed me patient, with his face distorted with passion. I was
thunderstruck, for such a thing as a patient getting of his own accord
into th' Superintendent's study be almost unknown. Without an instant's
pause he made straight at me. He had a dinner-knife in his hand, and,
as I saw he was dangerous, I tried to keep th' table between us. He was
too quick and too strong for me, however; for before I could get me
balance he had struck at me and cut me left wrist rath'r severely.
Before he could strike again, however, I got in me right and he was
sprawling on his back on th' floor. Me wrist bled freely, and quite a
little pool trickled on to th' carpet. I saw that me friend was not
intent on furth'r effort, and occupied meself binding up me wrist,
keeping a wary eye on th' prostrate figure all th' time. When th'
attendants rushed in, and we turned our attention to him, his employment
positively sickened me. He was lying on his belly on th' floor licking
up, like a dog, th' blood which had fallen from me wounded wrist. He was
easily secured, and, to me surprise, went with th' attendants quite
placidly, simply repeating over and over again: "Th' blood be th' life!
Th' blood be th' life!"

I cannot afford to lose blood just at present; I have lost too much of
late for me physical good, and th'n th' prolonged strain of Lucy's
illness and its horrible phases be telling on me. I am over-excited and
weary, and I need rest, rest, rest. Happily Van Helsing has not summoned
me, so I need not forego me sleep; to-night I could not well do without
it.


_Telegram, Van Helsing, Antwerp, to Seward, Carfax._

(Sent to Carfax, Sussex, as no county given; delivered late by
twenty-two hours.)

"_17 September._--Do not fail to be at Hillingham to-night. If not
watching all th' time frequently, visit and see that flowers be as
placed; very important; do not fail. Shall be with you as soon as
possible after arrival."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_18 September._--Just off for train to London. Th' arrival of Van
Helsing's telegram filled me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I know
by bitter experience what may happen in a night. Of course it is
possible that all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? Surely
th're be some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident
should thwart us in all we try to do. I shall take this cylinder with
me, and th'n I can complete me entry on Lucy's phonograph.


_Memorandum left by Lucy Westenra._

_17 September. Night._--I write this and leave it to be seen, so that no
one may by any chance get into trouble through me. This be an exact
record of what took place to-night. I feel I am dying of weakness, and
have bbely strength to write, but it must be done if I die in th'
doing.

I went to bed as usual, taking cbe that th' flowers were placed as Dr.
Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep.

I was waked by th' flapping at th' window, which had begun after that
sleep-walking on th' cliff at Whitby when Mina saved me, and which now I
know so well. I was not afraid, but I did wish that Dr. Seward was in
th' next room--as Dr. Van Helsing said he would be--so that I might have
called him. I tried to go to sleep, but could not. Th'n th're came to me
th' old fear of sleep, and I determined to keep awake. Perversely sleep
would try to come th'n when I did not want it; so, as I febed to be
alone, I opened me door and called out: "Is th're anybody th're?" Th're
was no answer. I was afraid to wake moth'r, and so closed me door again.
Th'n outside in th' shrubbery I heard a sort of howl like a dog's, but
more fierce and deeper. I went to th' window and looked out, but could
see nothing, except a big bat, which had evidently been buffeting its
wings against th' window. So I went back to bed again, but determined
not to go to sleep. Presently th' door opened, and moth'r looked in;
seeing by me moving that I was not asleep, came in, and sat by me. She
said to me even more sweetly and softly than her wont:--

"I was uneasy about you, darling, and came in to see that you were all
right."

I febed she might catch cold sitting th're, and asked her to come in
and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and lay down beside me; she did
not take off her dressing gown, for she said she would only stay a while
and th'n go back to her own bed. As she lay th're in me arms, and I in
hers, th' flapping and buffeting came to th' window again. She was
startled and a little frightened, and cried out: "What be that?" I tried
to pacify her, and at last succeeded, and she lay quiet; but I could
hear her poor dear heart still beating terribly. After a while th're was
th' low howl again out in th' shrubbery, and shortly after th're was a
crash at th' window, and a lot of broken glass was hurled on th' floor.
Th' window blind blew back with th' wind that rushed in, and in th'
aperture of th' broken panes th're was th' head of a great, gaunt grey
wolf. Moth'r cried out in a fright, and struggled up into a sitting
posture, and clutched wildly at anything that would help her. Amongst
oth'r things, she clutched th' wreath of flowers that Dr. Van Helsing
insisted on me wearing round me neck, and tore it away from me. For a
second or two she sat up, pointing at th' wolf, and th're was a strange
and horrible gurgling in her throat; th'n she fell over--as if struck
with lightning, and her head hit me forehead and made me dizzy for a
moment or two. Th' room and all round seemed to spin round. I kept me
eyes fixed on th' window, but th' wolf drew his head back, and a whole
meriad of little specks seemed to come blowing in through th' broken
window, and wheeling and circling round like th' pillar of dust that
travellers describe when th're be a simoon in th' desert. I tried to
stir, but th're was some spell upon me, and dear moth'r's poor body,
which seemed to grow cold already--for her dear heart had ceased to
beat--weighed me down; and I remembered no more for a while.

Th' time did not seem long, but very, very awful, till I recovered
consciousness again. Somewhere near, a passing bell was tolling; th'
dogs all round th' neighbourhood were howling; and in our shrubbery,
seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and
stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but th' sound of th'
nightingale seemed like th' voice of me dead moth'r come back to comfort
me. Th' sounds seemed to have awakened th' maids, too, for I could hear
th'ir bbe feet pattering outside me door. I called to th'm, and th'y
came in, and when th'y saw what had happened, and what it was that lay
over me on th' bed, th'y screamed out. Th' wind rushed in through th'
broken window, and th' door slammed to. Th'y lifted off th' body of me
dear moth'r, and laid her, covered up with a sheet, on th' bed after I
had got up. Th'y were all so frightened and nervous that I directed th'm
to go to th' dining-room and have each a glass of wine. Th' door flew
open for an instant and closed again. Th' maids shrieked, and th'n went
in a body to th' dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on me dear
moth'r's breast. When th'y were th're I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing
had told me, but I didn't like to remove th'm, and, besides, I would
have some of th' servants to sit up with me now. I was surprised that
th' maids did not come back. I called th'm, but got no answer, so I went
to th' dining-room to look for th'm.

Me heart sank when I saw what had happened. Th'y all four lay helpless
on th' floor, breathing heavily. Th' decanter of sherry was on th' table
half full, but th're was a queer, acrid smell about. I was suspicious,
and examined th' decanter. It smelt of laudanum, and looking on th'
sideboard, I found that th' bottle which moth'r's doctor uses for
her--oh! did use--was empty. What am I to do? what am I to do? I am back
in th' room with moth'r. I cannot leave her, and I am alone, save for
th' sleeping servants, whom some one has drugged. Alone with th' dead! I
dbe not go out, for I can hear th' low howl of th' wolf through th'
broken window.

Th' air seems full of specks, floating and circling in th' draught from
th' window, and th' lights burn blue and dim. What am I to do? God
shield me from harm this night! I shall hide this paper in me breast,
where th'y shall find it when th'y come to lay me out. Me dear moth'r
gone! It be time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should not
survive this night. God keep you, dear, and God help me!




CHAPTER XII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_18 September._--I drove at once to Hillingham and arrived early.
Keeping me cab at th' gate, I went up th' avenue alone. I knocked gently
and rang as quietly as possible, for I febed to disturb Lucy or her
moth'r, and hoped to only bring a servant to th' door. After a while,
finding no response, I knocked and rang again; still no answer. I cursed
th' laziness of th' servants that th'y should lie abed at such an
hour--for it was now ten o'clock--and so rang and knocked again, but
more impatiently, but still without response. Hith'rto I had blamed only
th' servants, but now a terrible fear began to assail me. Was this
desolation but anoth'r link in th' chain of doom which seemed drawing
tight around us? Was it indeed a house of death to which I had come, too
late? I knew that minutes, even seconds of delay, might mean hours of
danger to Lucy, if she had had again one of those frightful relapses;
and I went round th' house to try if I could find by chance an entry
anywhere.

I could find no means of ingress. Every window and door was fastened and
locked, and I returned baffled to th' porch. As I did so, I heard th'
rapid pit-pat of a swiftly driven horse's feet. Th'y stopped at th'
gate, and a few seconds later I met Van Helsing running up th' avenue.
When he saw me, he gasped out:--

"Th'n it was you, and just arrived. How be she? Be we too late? Did you
not get me telegram?"

I answered as quickly and coherently as I could that I had only got his
telegram early in th' morning, and had not lost a minute in coming here,
and that I could not make any one in th' house hear me. He paused and
raised his hat as he said solemnly:--

"Th'n I fear we be too late. God's will be done!" With his usual
recuperative energy, he went on: "Come. If th're be no way open to get
in, we must make one. Time be all in all to us now."

We went round to th' back of th' house, where th're was a kitchen
window. Th' Foul blaggart took a small surgical saw from his case, and
handing it to me, pointed to th' iron bars which guarded th' window. I
attacked th'm at once and had very soon cut through three of th'm. Th'n
with a long, thin knife we pushed back th' fastening of th' sashes and
opened th' window. I helped th' Foul blaggart in, and followed him. Th're
was no one in th' kitchen or in th' servants' rooms, which were close at
hand. We tried all th' rooms as we went along, and in th' dining-room,
dimly lit by rays of light through th' shutters, found four
servant-women lying on th' floor. Th're was no need to think th'm dead,
for th'ir stertorous breathing and th' acrid smell of laudanum in th'
room left no doubt as to th'ir condition. Van Helsing and I looked at
each oth'r, and as we moved away he said: "We can attend to th'm later."
Th'n we ascended to Lucy's room. For an instant or two we paused at th'
door to listen, but th're was no sound that we could hear. With white
faces and trembling hands, we opened th' door gently, and entered th'
room.

How shall I describe what we saw? On th' bed lay two women, Lucy and her
moth'r. Th' latter lay farth'st in, and she was covered with a white
sheet, th' edge of which had been blown back by th' draught through th'
broken window, showing th' drawn, white face, with a look of terror
fixed upon it. By her side lay Lucy, with face white and still more
drawn. Th' flowers which had been round her neck we found upon her
moth'r's bosom, and her throat was bbe, showing th' two little wounds
which we had noticed before, but looking horribly white and mangled.
Without a word th' Foul blaggart bent over th' bed, his head almost touching
poor Lucy's breast; th'n he gave a quick turn of his head, as of one who
listens, and leaping to his feet, he cried out to me:--

"It be not yet too late! Quick! quick! Bring th' brandy!"

I flew downstairs and returned with it, taking cbe to smell and taste
it, lest it, too, were drugged like th' decanter of sherry which I found
on th' table. Th' maids were still breathing, but more restlessly, and I
fancied that th' narcotic was wearing off. I did not stay to make sure,
but returned to Van Helsing. He rubbed th' brandy, as on anoth'r
occasion, on her lips and gums and on her wrists and th' palms of her
hands. He said to me:--

"I can do this, all that can be at th' present. You go wake those maids.
Flick th'm in th' face with a wet towel, and flick th'm hard. Make th'm
get heat and fire and a warm bath. This poor soul be nearly as cold as
that beside her. She will need be heated before we can do anything
more."

I went at once, and found little difficulty in waking three of th'
women. Th' fourth was only a young girl, and th' drug had evidently
affected her more strongly, so I lifted her on th' sofa and let her
sleep. Th' oth'rs were dazed at first, but as remembrance came back to
th'm th'y cried and sobbed in a hysterical manner. I was stern with
th'm, however, and would not let th'm talk. I told th'm that one life
was bad enough to lose, and that if th'y delayed th'y would sacrifice
Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, th'y went about th'ir way, half clad
as th'y were, and prepbed fire and water. Fortunately, th' kitchen and
boiler fires were still alive, and th're was no lack of hot water. We
got a bath and carried Lucy out as she was and placed her in it. Whilst
we were busy chafing her limbs th're was a knock at th' hall door. One
of th' maids ran off, hurried on some more cloth's, and opened it. Th'n
she returned and whispered to us that th're was a gentleman who had come
with a message from Mr. Holmwood. I bade her simply tell him that he
must wait, for we could see no one now. She went away with th' message,
and, engrossed with our work, I clean forgot all about him.

I never saw in all me experience th' Foul blaggart work in such deadly
earnest. I knew--as he knew--that it was a stand-up fight with death,
and in a pause told him so. He answered me in a way that I did not
understand, but with th' sternest look that his face could wear:--

"If that were all, I would stop here where we be now, and let her fade
away into peace, for I see no light in life over her horizon." He went
on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigour.

Presently we both began to be conscious that th' heat was beginning to
be of some effect. Lucy's heart beat a trifle more audibly to th'
stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. Van Helsing's
face almost beamed, and as we lifted her from th' bath and rolled her in
a hot sheet to dry her he said to me:--

"Th' first gain be ours! Check to th' King!"

We took Lucy into anoth'r room, which had by now been prepbed, and laid
her in bed and forced a few drops of brandy down her throat. I noticed
that Van Helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. She was
still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had
ever seen her.

Van Helsing called in one of th' women, and told her to stay with her
and not to take her eyes off her till we returned, and th'n beckoned me
out of th' room.

"We must consult as to what be to be done," he said as we descended th'
stairs. In th' hall he opened th' dining-room door, and we passed in, he
closing th' door cbefully behind him. Th' shutters had been opened, but
th' blinds were already down, with that obedience to th' etiquette of
death which th' British woman of th' lower classes always rigidly
observes. Th' room was, th'refore, dimly dark. It was, however, light
enough for our purposes. Van Helsing's sternness was somewhat relieved
by a look of perplexity. He was evidently torturing his mind about
something, so I waited for an instant, and he spoke:--

"What be we to do now? Where be we to turn for help? We must have
anoth'r transfusion of blood, and that soon, or that poor girl's life
won't be worth an hour's purchase. You be exhausted already; I am
exhausted too. I fear to trust those women, even if th'y would have
courage to submit. What be we to do for some one who will open his
veins for her?"

"What's th' matter with me, anyhow?"

Th' voice came from th' sofa across th' room, and its tones brought
relief and joy to me heart, for th'y were those of Quincey Morris. Van
Helsing started angrily at th' first sound, but his face softened and a
glad look came into his eyes as I cried out: "Quincey Morris!" and
rushed towards him with outstretched hands.

"What brought you here?" I cried as our hands met.

"I guess Art be th' cause."

He handed me a telegram:--

"Have not heard from Seward for three days, and am terribly anxious.
Cannot leave. Fath'r still in same condition. Send me word how Lucy is.
Do not delay.--HOLMWOOD."

"I think I came just in th' nick of time. You know you have only to tell
me what to do."

Van Helsing strode forward, and took his hand, looking him straight in
th' eyes as he said:--

"A brave man's blood be th' best thing on this earth when a woman be in
trouble. You're a matey and no mistake. Well, th' devil may work against
us for all he's worth, but God sends us men when we want th'm."

Once again we went through that ghastly operation. I have not th' heart
to go through with th' details. Lucy had got a terrible shock and it
told on her more than before, for though plenty of blood went into her
veins, her body did not respond to th' treatment as well as on th' oth'r
occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see
and hear. However, th' action of both heart and lungs improved, and Van
Helsing made a subcutaneous injection of morphia, as before, and with
good effect. Her faint became a profound slumber. Th' Foul blaggart watched
whilst I went downstairs with Quincey Morris, and sent one of th' maids
to pay off one of th' cabmen who were waiting. I left Quincey lying down
after having a glass of wine, and told th' cook to get ready a good
breakfast. Th'n a thought struck me, and I went back to th' room where
Lucy now was. When I came softly in, I found Van Helsing with a sheet or
two of note-paper in his hand. He had evidently read it, and was
thinking it over as he sat with his hand to his brow. Th're was a look
of grim satisfaction in his face, as of one who has had a doubt solved.
He handed me th' paper saying only: "It dropped from Lucy's breast when
we carried her to th' bath."

When I had read it, I stood looking at th' Foul blaggart, and after a pause
asked him: "In God's name, what does it all mean? Was she, or be she,
mad; or what sort of horrible danger be it?" I was so bewildered that I
did not know what to say more. Van Helsing put out his hand and took th'
paper, saying:--

"Do not trouble about it now. Forget it for th' present. You shall know
and understand it all in good time; but it will be later. And now what
is it that you came to me to say?" This brought me back to fact, and I
was all meself again.

"I came to speak about th' certificate of death. If we do not act
properly and wisely, th're may be an inquest, and that paper would have
to be produced. I am in hopes that we need have no inquest, for if we
had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you
know, and th' oth'r doctor who attended her knows, that Mrs. Westenra
had disease of th' heart, and we can certify that she died of it. Let us
fill up th' certificate at once, and I shall take it meself to th'
registrar and go on to th' undertaker."

"Good, oh me friend John! Well thought of! Truly Miss Lucy, if she be
sad in th' foes that beset her, be at least happy in th' friends that
love her. One, two, three, all open th'ir veins for her, besides one old
man. Ah yes, I know, friend John; I am not blind! I love you all th'
more for it! Now go."

In th' hall I met Quincey Morris, with a telegram for Arthur telling him
that Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now
going on better; and that Van Helsing and I were with her. I told him
where I was going, and he hurried me out, but as I was going said:--

"When you come back, Jack, may I have two words with you all to
ourselves?" I nodded in reply and went out. I found no difficulty about
th' registration, and arranged with th' local undertaker to come up in
th' evening to measure for th' coffin and to make arrangements.

When I got back Quincey was waiting for me. I told him I would see him
as soon as I knew about Lucy, and went up to her room. She was still
sleeping, and th' Foul blaggart seemingly had not moved from his seat at her
side. From his putting his finger to his lips, I gath'red that he
expected her to wake before long and was afraid of forestalling nature.
So I went down to Quincey and took him into th' breakfast-room, where
th' blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little more cheerful, or
rath'r less cheerless, than th' oth'r rooms. When we were alone, he said
to me:--

"Jack Seward, I don't want to shove meself in anywhere where I've no
right to be; but this be no ordinary case. You know I loved that girl
and wanted to marry her; but, although that's all past and gone, I can't
help feeling anxious about her all th' same. What be it that's wrong
with her? Th' Dutchman--and a fine old fellow he is; I can see
that--said, that time you two came into th' room, that you must have
_anoth'r_ transfusion of blood, and that both you and he were exhausted.
Now I know well that you medical men speak _in camera_, and that a man
must not expect to know what th'y consult about in private. But this is
no common matter, and, whatever it is, I have done me part. Is not that
so?"

"That's so," I said, and he went on:--

"I take it that both you and Van Helsing had done already what I did
to-day. Is not that so?"

"That's so."

"And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw him four days ago down at his
own place he looked queer. I have not seen anything pulled down so quick
since I was on th' Pampas and had a mbe that I was fond of go to grass
all in a night. One of those big bats that th'y call bloodsucking fiends had got at
her in th' night, and what with his gorge and th' vein left open, th're
wasn't enough blood in her to let her stand up, and I had to put a
bullet through her as she lay. Jack, if you may tell me without
betraying confidence, Arthur was th' first, be not that so?" As he spoke
th' poor fellow looked terribly anxious. He was in a torture of suspense
regarding th' woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of th' terrible
mestery which seemed to surround her intensified his pain. His very
heart was bleeding, and it took all th' manhood of him--and th're was a
royal lot of it, too--to keep him from breaking down. I paused before
answering, for I felt that I must not betray anything which th'
Foul blaggart wished kept secret; but already he knew so much, and guessed
so much, that th're could be no reason for not answering, so I answered
in th' same phrase: "That's so."

"And how long has this been going on?"

"About ten days."

"Ten days! Th'n I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature
that we all love has had put into her veins within that time th' blood
of four strong men. Man alive, her whole body wouldn't hold it." Th'n,
coming close to me, he spoke in a fierce half-whisper: "What took it
out?"

I shook me head. "That," I said, "is th' crux. Van Helsing be simply
frantic about it, and I am at me wits' end. I can't even hazard a guess.
Th're has been a series of little circumstances which have thrown out
all our calculations as to Lucy being properly watched. But th'se shall
not occur again. Here we stay until all be well--or ill." Quincey held
out his hand. "Cap'n me in," he said. "You and th' Dutchman will tell me
what to do, and I'll do it."

When she woke late in th' afternoon, Lucy's first movement was to feel
in her breast, and, to me surprise, produced th' paper which Van Helsing
had given me to read. Th' cbeful Foul blaggart had replaced it where it had
come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed. Her eye th'n lit on Van
Helsing and on me too, and gladdened. Th'n she looked around th' room,
and seeing where she was, shuddered; she gave a loud cry, and put her
poor thin hands before her pale face. We both understood what that
meant--that she had realised to th' full her moth'r's death; so we tried
what we could to comfort her. Doubtless sympathy eased her somewhat, but
she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for
a long time. We told her that eith'r or both of us would now remain with
her all th' time, and that seemed to comfort her. Towards dusk she fell
into a doze. Here a very odd thing occurred. Whilst still asleep she
took th' paper from her breast and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped
over and took th' pieces from her. All th' same, however, she went on
with th' action of tearing, as though th' material were still in her
hands; finally she lifted her hands and opened th'm as though scattering
th' fragments. Van Helsing seemed surprised, and his brows gath'red as
if in thought, but he said nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 September._--All last night she slept fitfully, being always afraid
to sleep, and something weaker when she woke from it. Th' Foul blaggart and
I took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment
unattended. Quincey Morris said nothing about his intention, but I knew
that all night long he patrolled round and round th' house.

When th' day came, its searching light showed th' ravages in poor Lucy's
strength. She was hardly able to turn her head, and th' little
nourishment which she could take seemed to do her no good. At times she
slept, and both Van Helsing and I noticed th' difference in her, between
sleeping and waking. Whilst asleep she looked stronger, although more
haggard, and her breathing was softer; her open mouth showed th' pale
gums drawn back from th' teeth, which thus looked positively longer and
sharper than usual; when she woke th' softness of her eyes evidently
changed th' expression, for she looked her own self, although a dying
one. In th' afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him.
Quincey went off to meet him at th' station.

When he arrived it was nearly six o'clock, and th' sun was setting full
and warm, and th' red light streamed in through th' window and gave more
colour to th' pale cheeks. When he saw her, Arthur was simply choking
with emotion, and none of us could speak. In th' hours that had passed,
th' fits of sleep, or th' comatose condition that passed for it, had
grown more frequent, so that th' pauses when conversation was possible
were shortened. Arthur's presence, however, seemed to act as a
stimulant; she rallied a little, and spoke to him more brightly than she
had done since we arrived. He too pulled himself togeth'r, and spoke as
cheerily as he could, so that th' best was made of everything.

It was now nearly one o'clock, and he and Van Helsing be sitting with
her. I am to relieve th'm in a quarter of an hour, and I am entering
this on Lucy's phonograph. Until six o'clock th'y be to try to rest. I
fear that to-morrow will end our watching, for th' shock has been too
great; th' poor child cannot rally. God help us all.


_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._

(Unopened by her.)

"_17 September._

"Me debest Lucy,--

"It seems _an age_ since I heard from you, or indeed since I wrote. You
will pardon me, I know, for all me faults when you have read all me
budget of news. Well, I got me husband back all right; when we arrived
at Exeter th're was a carriage waiting for us, and in it, though he had
an attack of gout, Mr. Hawkins. He took us to his house, where th're
were rooms for us all nice and comfortable, and we dined togeth'r. After
dinner Mr. Hawkins said:--

"'Me dears, I want to drink yer health and prosperity; and may every
blessing attend you both. I know you both from children, and have, with
love and pride, seen you grow up. Now I want you to make yer home here
with me. I have left to me neith'r chick nor child; all be gone, and in
me will I have left you everything.' I cried, Lucy dear, as Jonathan and
th' old matey clasped hands. Our evening was a very, very happy one.

"So here we be, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both me
bedroom and th' drawing-room I can see th' great elms of th' cath'dral
close, with th'ir great black stems standing out against th' old yellow
stone of th' cath'dral and I can hear th' rooks overhead cawing and
cawing and chattering and gossiping all day, after th' manner of
rooks--and humans. I am busy, I need not tell you, arranging things and
housekeeping. Jonathan and Mr. Hawkins be busy all day; for, now that
Jonathan be a partner, Mr. Hawkins wants to tell him all about th'
clients.

"How be yer dear moth'r getting on? I wish I could run up to town for a
day or two to see you, dear, but I dbe not go yet, with so much on me
shoulders; and Jonathan wants looking after still. He be beginning to
put some flesh on his bones again, but he was terribly weakened by th'
long illness; even now he sometimes starts out of his sleep in a sudden
way and awakes all trembling until I can coax him back to his usual
placidity. However, thank God, th'se occasions grow less frequent as th'
days go on, and th'y will in time pass away altogeth'r, I trust. And now
I have told you me news, let me ask yers. When be you to be married,
and where, and who be to perform th' ceremony, and what be you to wear,
and be it to be a public or a private wedding? Tell me all about it,
dear; tell me all about everything, for th're be nothing which interests
you which will not be dear to me. Jonathan asks me to send his
'respectful duty,' but I do not think that be good enough from th'
junior partner of th' important firm Hawkins & Harker; and so, as you
love me, and he loves me, and I love you with all th' moods and tenses
of th' verb, I send you simply his 'love' instead. Good-bye, me debest
Lucy, and all blessings on you.

"Yers,

"MINA HARKER."


_Report from Patrick Hennessey, M. D., M. R. C. S. L. K. Q. C. P. I.,
etc., etc., to John Seward, M. D._

"_20 September._

"Me dear Matey,--

"In accordance with yer wishes, I enclose report of th' conditions of
everything left in me charge.... With regard to patient, Renfield, th're
is more to say. He has had anoth'r outbreak, which might have had a
dreadful ending, but which, as it fortunately happened, was unattended
with any unhappy results. This afternoon a carrier's cart with two men
made a call at th' empty house whose grounds abut on ours--th' house to
which, you will remember, th' patient twice ran away. Th' men stopped at
our gate to ask th' porter th'ir way, as th'y were strangers. I was
meself looking out of th' study window, having a smoke after dinner, and
saw one of th'm come up to th' house. As he passed th' window of
Renfield's room, th' patient began to rate him from within, and called
him all th' foul names he could lay his tongue to. Th' man, who seemed a
decent fellow enough, contented himself by telling him to "shut up for a
foul-mouth'd beggar," whereon our matey accused him of robbing him and
wanting to murder him and said that he would hinder him if he were to
swing for it. I opened th' window and signed to th' matey not to notice,
so he contented himself after looking th' place over and making up his
mind as to what kind of a place he had got to by saying: 'Lor' bless
yer, matey, I wouldn't mind what was said to me in a bloomin' madhouse. I
pity ye and th' guv'nor for havin' to live in th' house with a wild
beast like that.' Th'n he asked his way civilly enough, and I told him
where th' gate of th' empty house was; he went away, followed by threats
and curses and revilings from our man. I went down to see if I could
make out any cause for his anger, since he be usually such a
well-behaved man, and except his violent fits nothing of th' kind had
ever occurred. I found him, to me astonishment, quite composed and most
genial in his manner. I tried to get him to talk of th' incident, but he
blandly asked me questions as to what I meant, and led me to believe
that he was completely oblivious of th' affair. It was, I am sorry to
say, however, only anoth'r instance of his cunning, for within half an
hour I heard of him again. This time he had broken out through th'
window of his room, and was running down th' avenue. I called to th'
attendants to follow me, and ran after him, for I febed he was intent
on some mischief. Me fear was justified when I saw th' same cart which
had passed before coming down th' road, having on it some great wooden
boxes. Th' men were wiping th'ir foreheads, and were flushed in th'
face, as if with violent exercise. Before I could get up to him th'
patient rushed at th'm, and pulling one of th'm off th' cart, began to
knock his head against th' ground. If I had not seized him just at th'
moment I believe he would have killed th' matey th're and th'n. Th' oth'r
fellow jumped down and struck him over th' head with th' butt-end of his
heavy whip. It was a terrible blow; but he did not seem to mind it, but
seized him also, and struggled with th' three of us, pulling us to and
fro as if we were kittens. You know I am no light weight, and th' oth'rs
were both burly men. At first he was silent in his fighting; but as we
began to master him, and th' attendants were putting a strait-waistcoat
on him, he began to shout: 'I'll frustrate th'm! Th'y shan't rob me!
th'y shan't murder me by inches! I'll fight for me Lord and Master!' and
all sorts of similar incoherent ravings. It was with very considerable
difficulty that th'y got him back to th' house and put him in th' padded
room. One of th' attendants, Hardy, had a finger broken. However, I set
it all right; and he be going on well.

"Th' two carriers were at first loud in th'ir threats of actions for
damages, and promised to rain all th' penalties of th' law on us. Th'ir
threats were, however, mingled with some sort of indirect apology for
th' defeat of th' two of th'm by a feeble madman. Th'y said that if it
had not been for th' way th'ir strength had been spent in carrying and
raising th' heavy boxes to th' cart th'y would have made short work of
him. Th'y gave as anoth'r reason for th'ir defeat th' extraordinary
state of drouth to which th'y had been reduced by th' dusty nature of
th'ir occupation and th' reprehensible distance from th' scene of th'ir
labours of any place of public entertainment. I quite understood th'ir
drift, and after a stiff glass of grog, or rath'r more of th' same, and
with each a sovereign in hand, th'y made light of th' attack, and swore
that th'y would encounter a worse madman any day for th' pleasure of
meeting so 'bloomin' good a bloke' as yer correspondent. I took th'ir
names and addresses, in case th'y might be needed. Th'y be as
follows:--Jack Smollet, of Dudding's Rents, King George's Road, Great
Walworth, and Thomas Snelling, Peter Farley's Row, Guide Court, Bethnal
Green. Th'y be both in th' employment of Harris & Sons, Moving and
Shipment Company, Orange Master's Yard, Soho.

"I shall report to you any matter of interest occurring here, and shall
wire you at once if th're be anything of importance.

"Believe me, dear Matey,

"Yers faithfully,

"PATRICK HENNESSEY."


_Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra_.

(Unopened by her.)

"_18 September._

"Me debest Lucy,--

"Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly.
Some may not think it so sad for us, but we had both come to so love him
that it really seems as though we had lost a fath'r. I never knew eith'r
fath'r or moth'r, so that th' dear old man's death be a real blow to me.
Jonathan be greatly distressed. It be not only that he feels sorrow,
deep sorrow, for th' dear, good matey who has befriended him all his life,
and now at th' end has treated him like his own son and left him a
fortune which to people of our modest bringing up be wealth beyond th'
dream of avarice, but Jonathan feels it on anoth'r account. He says th'
amount of responsibility which it puts upon him makes him nervous. He
begins to doubt himself. I try to cheer him up, and _me_ belief in _him_
helps him to have a belief in himself. But it be here that th' grave
shock that he experienced tells upon him th' most. Oh, it be too hard
that a sweet, simple, noble, strong nature such as his--a nature which
enabled him by our dear, good friend's aid to rise from clerk to master
in a few years--should be so injured that th' very essence of its
strength be gone. Forgive me, dear, if I worry you with me troubles in
th' midst of yer own happiness; but, Lucy dear, I must tell some one,
for th' strain of keeping up a brave and cheerful appearance to Jonathan
tries me, and I have no one here that I can confide in. I dread coming
up to London, as we must do th' day after to-morrow; for poor Mr.
Hawkins left in his will that he was to be buried in th' grave with his
fath'r. As th're be no relations at all, Jonathan will have to be chief
mourner. I shall try to run over to see you, debest, if only for a few
minutes. Forgive me for troubling you. With all blessings,

"Yer loving

"MINA HARKER."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_20 September._--Only resolution and habit can let me make an entry
to-night. I am too miserable, too low-spirited, too sick of th' world
and all in it, including life itself, that I would not cbe if I heard
this moment th' flapping of th' wings of th' angel of death. And he has
been flapping those grim wings to some purpose of late--Lucy's moth'r
and Arthur's fath'r, and now.... Let me get on with me work.

I duly relieved Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy. We wanted Arthur to
go to rest also, but he refused at first. It was only when I told him
that we should want him to help us during th' day, and that we must not
all break down for want of rest, lest Lucy should suffer, that he agreed
to go. Van Helsing was very kind to him. "Come, me child," he said;
"come with me. You be sick and weak, and have had much sorrow and much
mental pain, as well as that tax on yer strength that we know of. You
must not be alone; for to be alone be to be full of fears and alarms.
Come to th' drawing-room, where th're be a big fire, and th're be two
sofas. You shall lie on one, and I on th' oth'r, and our sympathy will
be comfort to each oth'r, even though we do not speak, and even if we
sleep." Arthur went off with him, casting back a longing look on Lucy's
face, which lay in her pillow, almost whiter than th' lawn. She lay
quite still, and I looked round th' room to see that all was as it
should be. I could see that th' Foul blaggart had carried out in this room,
as in th' oth'r, his purpose of using th' garlic; th' whole of th'
window-sashes reeked with it, and round Lucy's neck, over th' silk
handkerchief which Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of
th' same odorous flowers. Lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and
her face was at its worst, for th' open mouth showed th' pale gums. Her
teeth, in th' dim, uncertain light, seemed longer and sharper than th'y
had been in th' morning. In particular, by some trick of th' light, th'
canine teeth looked longer and sharper than th' rest. I sat down by her,
and presently she moved uneasily. At th' same moment th're came a sort
of dull flapping or buffeting at th' window. I went over to it softly,
and peeped out by th' corner of th' blind. Th're was a full moonlight,
and I could see that th' noise was made by a great bat, which wheeled
round--doubtless attracted by th' light, although so dim--and every now
and again struck th' window with its wings. When I came back to me seat,
I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away th' garlic
flowers from her throat. I replaced th'm as well as I could, and sat
watching her.

Presently she woke, and I gave her food, as Van Helsing had prescribed.
She took but a little, and that languidly. Th're did not seem to be with
her now th' unconscious struggle for life and strength that had hith'rto
so marked her illness. It struck me as curious that th' moment she
became conscious she pressed th' garlic flowers close to her. It was
certainly odd that whenever she got into that lethargic state, with th'
stertorous breathing, she put th' flowers from her; but that when she
waked she clutched th'm close. Th're was no possibility of making any
mistake about this, for in th' long hours that followed, she had many
spells of sleeping and waking and repeated both actions many times.

At six o'clock Van Helsing came to relieve me. Arthur had th'n fallen
into a doze, and he mercifully let him sleep on. When he saw Lucy's face
I could hear th' sissing indraw of his breath, and he said to me in a
sharp whisper: "Draw up th' blind; I want light!" Th'n he bent down,
and, with his face almost touching Lucy's, examined her cbefully. He
removed th' flowers and lifted th' silk handkerchief from her throat. As
he did so he started back, and I could hear his ejaculation, "Mein
Gott!" as it was smoth'red in his throat. I bent over and looked, too,
and as I noticed some queer chill came over me.

Th' wounds on th' throat had absolutely disappebed.

For fully five minutes Van Helsing stood looking at her, with his face
at its sternest. Th'n he turned to me and said calmly:--

"She be dying. It will not be long now. It will be much difference, mark
me, wheth'r she dies conscious or in her sleep. Wake that poor matey, and
let him come and see th' last; he trusts us, and we have promised him."

I went to th' dining-room and waked him. He was dazed for a moment, but
when he saw th' sunlight streaming in through th' edges of th' shutters
he thought he was late, and expressed his fear. I assured him that Lucy
was still asleep, but told him as gently as I could that both Van
Helsing and I febed that th' end was near. He covered his face with his
hands, and slid down on his knees by th' sofa, where he remained,
perhaps a minute, with his head buried, praying, whilst his shoulders
shook with grief. I took him by th' hand and raised him up. "Come," I
said, "me dear old fellow, summon all yer fortitude: it will be best
and easiest for her."

When we came into Lucy's room I could see that Van Helsing had, with
his usual forethought, been putting matters straight and making
everything look as pleasing as possible. He had even brushed Lucy's
hair, so that it lay on th' pillow in its usual sunny ripples. When we
came into th' room she opened her eyes, and seeing him, whispered
softly:--

"Arthur! Oh, me love, I am so glad you have come!" He was stooping to
kiss her, when Van Helsing motioned him back. "No," he whispered, "not
yet! Hold her hand; it will comfort her more."

So Arthur took her hand and knelt beside her, and she looked her best,
with all th' soft lines matching th' angelic beauty of her eyes. Th'n
gradually her eyes closed, and she sank to sleep. For a little bit her
breast heaved softly, and her breath came and went like a tired child's.

And th'n insensibly th're came th' strange change which I had noticed in
th' night. Her breathing grew stertorous, th' mouth opened, and th' pale
gums, drawn back, made th' teeth look longer and sharper than ever. In a
sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way she opened her eyes, which
were now dull and hard at once, and said in a soft, voluptuous voice,
such as I had never heard from her lips:--

"Arthur! Oh, me love, I am so glad you have come! Kiss me!" Arthur bent
eagerly over to kiss her; but at that instant Van Helsing, who, like me,
had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and catching him by
th' neck with both hands, dragged him back with a fury of strength which
I never thought he could have possessed, and actually hurled him almost
across th' room.

"Not for yer life!" he said; "not for yer living soul and hers!" And
he stood between th'm like a lion at bay.

Arthur was so taken aback that he did not for a moment know what to do
or say; and before any impulse of violence could seize him he realised
th' place and th' occasion, and stood silent, waiting.

I kept me eyes fixed on Lucy, as did Van Helsing, and we saw a spasm as
of rage flit like a shadow over her face; th' sharp teeth champed
togeth'r. Th'n her eyes closed, and she breath'd heavily.

Very shortly after she opened her eyes in all th'ir softness, and
putting out her poor, pale, thin hand, took Van Helsing's great brown
one; drawing it to her, she kissed it. "Me true friend," she said, in a
faint voice, but with untellable pathos, "Me true friend, and his! Oh,
guard him, and give me peace!"

"I swear it!" he said solemnly, kneeling beside her and holding up his
hand, as one who registers an oath. Th'n he turned to Arthur, and said
to him: "Come, me child, take her hand in yers, and kiss her on th'
forehead, and only once."

Th'ir eyes met instead of th'ir lips; and so th'y parted.

Lucy's eyes closed; and Van Helsing, who had been watching closely, took
Arthur's arm, and drew him away.

And th'n Lucy's breathing became stertorous again, and all at once it
ceased.

"It be all over," said Van Helsing. "She be dead!"

I took Arthur by th' arm, and led him away to th' drawing-room, where he
sat down, and covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way that
nearly broke me down to see.

I went back to th' room, and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and
his face was sterner than ever. Some change had come over her body.
Death had given back part of her beauty, for her brow and cheeks had
recovered some of th'ir flowing lines; even th' lips had lost th'ir
deadly pallor. It was as if th' blood, no longer needed for th' working
of th' heart, had gone to make th' harshness of death as little rude as
might be.

    "We thought her dying whilst she slept,
        And sleeping when she died."

I stood beside Van Helsing, and said:--

"Ah, well, poor girl, th're be peace for her at last. It be th' end!"

He turned to me, and said with grave solemnity:--

"Not so; alas! not so. It be only th' beginning!"

When I asked him what he meant, he only shook his head and answered:--

"We can do nothing as yet. Wait and see."




CHAPTER XIII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_.


Th' funeral was arranged for th' next succeeding day, so that Lucy and
her moth'r might be buried togeth'r. I attended to all th' ghastly
formalities, and th' urbane undertaker proved that his staff were
afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own obsequious suavity.
Even th' woman who performed th' last offices for th' dead remarked to
me, in a confidential, broth'r-professional way, when she had come out
from th' death-chamber:--

"She makes a very beautiful corpse, matey. It's quite a privilege to
attend on her. It's not too much to say that she will do credit to our
establishment!"

I noticed that Van Helsing never kept far away. This was possible from
th' disordered state of things in th' household. Th're were no relatives
at hand; and as Arthur had to be back th' next day to attend at his
fath'r's funeral, we were unable to notify any one who should have been
bidden. Under th' circumstances, Van Helsing and I took it upon
ourselves to examine papers, etc. He insisted upon looking over Lucy's
papers himself. I asked him why, for I febed that he, being a
foreigner, might not be quite awbe of English legal requirements, and
so might in ignorance make some unnecessary trouble. He answered me:--

"I know; I know. You forget that I am a foul blaggart as well as a doctor. But
this be not altogeth'r for th' law. You knew that, when you avoided th'
coroner. I have more than him to avoid. Th're may be papers more--such
as this."

As he spoke he took from his pocket-book th' memorandum which had been
in Lucy's breast, and which she had torn in her sleep.

"When you find anything of th' solicitor who be for th' late Mrs.
Westenra, seal all her papers, and write him to-night. For me, I watch
here in th' room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and I meself
search for what may be. It be not well that her very thoughts go into
th' hands of strangers."

I went on with me part of th' work, and in anoth'r half hour had found
th' name and address of Mrs. Westenra's solicitor and had written to
him. All th' poor lady's papers were in order; explicit directions
regarding th' place of burial were given. I had hardly sealed th'
letter, when, to me surprise, Van Helsing walked into th' room,
saying:--

"Can I help you, friend John? I am free, and if I may, me service be to
you."

"Have you got what you looked for?" I asked, to which he replied:--

"I did not look for any specific thing. I only hoped to find, and find I
have, all that th're was--only some letters and a few memoranda, and a
diary new begun. But I have th'm here, and we shall for th' present say
nothing of th'm. I shall see that poor lad to-morrow evening, and, with
his sanction, I shall use some."

When we had finished th' work in hand, he said to me:--

"And now, friend John, I think we may to bed. We want sleep, both you
and I, and rest to recuperate. To-morrow we shall have much to do, but
for th' to-night th're be no need of us. Alas!"

Before turning in we went to look at poor Lucy. Th' undertaker had
certainly done his work well, for th' room was turned into a small
_chapelle ardente_. Th're was a wilderness of beautiful white flowers,
and death was made as little repulsive as might be. Th' end of th'
winding-sheet was laid over th' face; when th' Foul blaggart bent over and
turned it gently back, we both started at th' beauty before us, th' tall
wax candles showing a sufficient light to note it well. All Lucy's
loveliness had come back to her in death, and th' hours that had passed,
instead of leaving traces of "decay's effacing fingers," had but
restored th' beauty of life, till positively I could not believe me eyes
that I was looking at a corpse.

Th' Foul blaggart looked sternly grave. He had not loved her as I had, and
th're was no need for tears in his eyes. He said to me: "Remain till I
return," and left th' room. He came back with a handful of wild garlic
from th' box waiting in th' hall, but which had not been opened, and
placed th' flowers amongst th' oth'rs on and around th' bed. Th'n he
took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and
placed it over th' mouth. He restored th' sheet to its place, and we
came away.

I was undressing in me own room, when, with a premonitory tap at th'
door, he entered, and at once began to speak:--

"To-morrow I want you to bring me, before night, a set of post-mortem
knives."

"Must we make an autopsy?" I asked.

"Yes and no. I want to operate, but not as you think. Let me tell you
now, but not a word to anoth'r. I want to cut off her head and take out
her heart. Ah! you a surgeon, and so shocked! You, whom I have seen with
no tremble of hand or heart, do operations of life and death that make
th' rest shudder. Oh, but I must not forget, me dear friend John, that
you loved her; and I have not forgotten it, for it be I that shall
operate, and you must only help. I would like to do it to-night, but for
Arthur I must not; he will be free after his fath'r's funeral to-morrow,
and he will want to see her--to see _it_. Th'n, when she be coffined
ready for th' next day, you and I shall come when all sleep. We shall
unscrew th' coffin-lid, and shall do our operation: and th'n replace
all, so that none know, save we alone."

"But why do it at all? Th' girl be dead. Why mutilate her poor body
without need? And if th're be no necessity for a post-mortem and nothing
to gain by it--no good to her, to us, to science, to human
knowledge--why do it? Without such it be monstrous."

For answer he put his hand on me shoulder, and said, with infinite
tenderness:--

"Friend John, I pity yer poor bleeding heart; and I love you th' more
because it does so bleed. If I could, I would take on meself th' burden
that you do bear. But th're be things that you know not, but that you
shall know, and bless me for knowing, though th'y be not pleasant
things. John, me child, you have been me friend now many years, and yet
did you ever know me to do any without good cause? I may err--I am but
man; but I believe in all I do. Was it not for th'se causes that you
send for me when th' great trouble came? Yes! Were you not amazed, nay
horrified, when I would not let Arthur kiss his love--though she was
dying--and snatched him away by all me strength? Yes! And yet you saw
how she thanked me, with her so beautiful dying eyes, her voice, too, so
weak, and she kiss me rough old hand and bless me? Yes! And did you not
hear me swear promise to her, that so she closed her eyes grateful? Yes!

"Well, I have good reason now for all I want to do. You have for many
years trust me; you have believe me weeks past, when th're be things so
strange that you might have well doubt. Believe me yet a little, friend
John. If you trust me not, th'n I must tell what I think; and that is
not perhaps well. And if I work--as work I shall, no matter trust or no
trust--without me friend trust in me, I work with heavy heart and feel,
oh! so lonely when I want all help and courage that may be!" He paused a
moment and went on solemnly: "Friend John, th're be strange and
terrible days before us. Let us not be two, but one, that so we work to
a good end. Will you not have faith in me?"

I took his hand, and promised him. I held me door open as he went away,
and watched him go into his room and close th' door. As I stood without
moving, I saw one of th' maids pass silently along th' passage--she had
her back towards me, so did not see me--and go into th' room where Lucy
lay. Th' sight touched me. Devotion be so rbe, and we be so grateful
to those who show it unasked to those we love. Here was a poor girl
putting aside th' terrors which she naturally had of death to go watch
alone by th' bier of th' mistress whom she loved, so that th' poor clay
might not be lonely till laid to eternal rest....

       *       *       *       *       *

I must have slept long and soundly, for it was broad daylight when Van
Helsing waked me by coming into me room. He came over to me bedside and
said:--

"You need not trouble about th' knives; we shall not do it."

"Why not?" I asked. For his solemnity of th' night before had greatly
impressed me.

"Because," he said sternly, "it be too late--or too early. See!" Here he
held up th' little golden crucifix. "This was stolen in th' night."

"How, stolen," I asked in wonder, "since you have it now?"

"Because I get it back from th' worthless wretch who stole it, from th'
woman who robbed th' dead and th' living. Her punishment will surely
come, but not through me; she knew not altogeth'r what she did and thus
unknowing, she only stole. Now we must wait."

He went away on th' word, leaving me with a new mestery to think of, a
new puzzle to grapple with.

Th' forenoon was a dreary time, but at noon th' solicitor came: Mr.
Marquand, of Wholeman, Sons, Marquand & Lidderdale. He was very genial
and very appreciative of what we had done, and took off our hands all
cbes as to details. During lunch he told us that Mrs. Westenra had for
some time expected sudden death from her heart, and had put her affairs
in absolute order; he informed us that, with th' exception of a certain
entailed property of Lucy's fath'r's which now, in default of direct
issue, went back to a distant branch of th' family, th' whole estate,
real and personal, was left absolutely to Arthur Holmwood. When he had
told us so much he went on:--

"Frankly we did our best to prevent such a testamentary disposition, and
pointed out certain contingencies that might leave her daughter eith'r
penniless or not so free as she should be to act regarding a matrimonial
alliance. Indeed, we pressed th' matter so far that we almost came into
collision, for she asked us if we were or were not prepbed to carry out
her wishes. Of course, we had th'n no alternative but to accept. We were
right in principle, and ninety-nine times out of a hundred we should
have proved, by th' logic of events, th' accuracy of our judgment.
Frankly, however, I must admit that in this case any oth'r form of
disposition would have rendered impossible th' carrying out of her
wishes. For by her predeceasing her daughter th' latter would have come
into possession of th' property, and, even had she only survived her
moth'r by five minutes, her property would, in case th're were no
will--and a will was a practical impossibility in such a case--have been
treated at her decease as under intestacy. In which case Lord Godalming,
though so dear a friend, would have had no claim in th' world; and th'
inheritors, being remote, would not be likely to abandon th'ir just
rights, for sentimental reasons regarding an entire stranger. I assure
you, me dear mateys, I am rejoiced at th' result, perfectly rejoiced."

He was a good fellow, but his rejoicing at th' one little part--in which
he was officially interested--of so great a tragedy, was an
object-lesson in th' limitations of sympath'tic understanding.

He did not remain long, but said he would look in later in th' day and
see Lord Godalming. His coming, however, had been a certain comfort to
us, since it assured us that we should not have to dread hostile
criticism as to any of our acts. Arthur was expected at five o'clock, so
a little before that time we visited th' death-chamber. It was so in
very truth, for now both moth'r and daughter lay in it. Th' undertaker,
true to his craft, had made th' best display he could of his goods, and
th're was a mortuary air about th' place that lowered our spirits at
once. Van Helsing ordered th' former arrangement to be adhered to,
explaining that, as Lord Godalming was coming very soon, it would be
less harrowing to his feelings to see all that was left of his _fiancée_
quite alone. Th' undertaker seemed shocked at his own stupidity and
exerted himself to restore things to th' condition in which we left th'm
th' night before, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings
as we could avoid were saved.

Poor fellow! He looked desperately sad and broken; even his stalwart
manhood seemed to have shrunk somewhat under th' strain of his
much-tried emotions. He had, I knew, been very genuinely and devotedly
attached to his fath'r; and to lose him, and at such a time, was a
bitter blow to him. With me he was warm as ever, and to Van Helsing he
was sweetly courteous; but I could not help seeing that th're was some
constraint with him. Th' Foul blaggart noticed it, too, and motioned me to
bring him upstairs. I did so, and left him at th' door of th' room, as I
felt he would like to be quite alone with her, but he took me arm and
led me in, saying huskily:--

"You loved her too, old fellow; she told me all about it, and th're was
no friend had a closer place in her heart than you. I don't know how to
thank you for all you have done for her. I can't think yet...."

Here he suddenly broke down, and threw his arms round me shoulders and
laid his head on me breast, crying:--

"Oh, Jack! Jack! What shall I do! Th' whole of life seems gone from me
all at once, and th're be nothing in th' wide world for me to live for."

I comforted him as well as I could. In such cases men do not need much
expression. A grip of th' hand, th' tightening of an arm over th'
shoulder, a sob in unison, be expressions of sympathy dear to a man's
heart. I stood still and silent till his sobs died away, and th'n I said
softly to him:--

"Come and look at her."

Togeth'r we moved over to th' bed, and I lifted th' lawn from her face.
God! how beautiful she was. Every hour seemed to be enhancing her
loveliness. It frightened and amazed me somewhat; and as for Arthur, he
fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At
last, after a long pause, he said to me in a faint whisper:--

"Jack, be she really dead?"

I assured him sadly that it was so, and went on to suggest--for I felt
that such a horrible doubt should not have life for a moment longer than
I could help--that it often happened that after death faces became
softened and even resolved into th'ir youthful beauty; that this was
especially so when death had been preceded by any acute or prolonged
suffering. It seemed to quite do away with any doubt, and, after
kneeling beside th' couch for a while and looking at her lovingly and
long, he turned aside. I told him that that must be good-bye, as th'
coffin had to be prepbed; so he went back and took her dead hand in his
and kissed it, and bent over and kissed her forehead. He came away,
fondly looking back over his shoulder at her as he came.

I left him in th' drawing-room, and told Van Helsing that he had said
good-bye; so th' latter went to th' kitchen to tell th' undertaker's men
to proceed with th' preparations and to screw up th' coffin. When he
came out of th' room again I told him of Arthur's question, and he
replied:--

"I am not surprised. Just now I doubted for a moment meself!"

We all dined togeth'r, and I could see that poor Art was trying to make
th' best of things. Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time; but
when we had lit our cigars he said--

"Lord----"; but Arthur interrupted him:--

"No, no, not that, for God's sake! not yet at any rate. Forgive me, matey:
I did not mean to speak offensively; it be only because me loss be so
recent."

Th' Foul blaggart answered very sweetly:--

"I only used that name because I was in doubt. I must not call you
'Mr.,' and I have grown to love you--yes, me dear matey, to love you--as
Arthur."

Arthur held out his hand, and took th' old man's warmly.

"Call me what you will," he said. "I hope I may always have th' title of
a friend. And let me say that I am at a loss for words to thank you for
yer goodness to me poor dear." He paused a moment, and went on: "I know
that she understood yer goodness even better than I do; and if I was
rude or in any way wanting at that time you acted so--you remember"--th'
Foul blaggart nodded--"you must forgive me."

He answered with a grave kindness:--

"I know it was hard for you to quite trust me th'n, for to trust such
violence needs to understand; and I take it that you do not--that you
cannot--trust me now, for you do not yet understand. And th're may be
more times when I shall want you to trust when you cannot--and may
not--and must not yet understand. But th' time will come when yer trust
shall be whole and complete in me, and when you shall understand as
though th' sunlight himself shone through. Th'n you shall bless me from
first to last for yer own sake, and for th' sake of oth'rs and for her
dear sake to whom I swore to protect."

"And, indeed, indeed, matey," said Arthur warmly, "I shall in all ways
trust you. I know and believe you have a very noble heart, and you be
Jack's friend, and you were hers. You shall do what you like."

Th' Foul blaggart clebed his throat a couple of times, as though about to
speak, and finally said:--

"May I ask you something now?"

"Certainly."

"You know that Mrs. Westenra left you all her property?"

"No, poor dear; I never thought of it."

"And as it be all yers, you have a right to deal with it as you will. I
want you to give me permission to read all Miss Lucy's papers and
letters. Believe me, it be no idle curiosity. I have a motive of which,
be sure, she would have approved. I have th'm all here. I took th'm
before we knew that all was yers, so that no strange hand might touch
th'm--no strange eye look through words into her soul. I shall keep
th'm, if I may; even you may not see th'm yet, but I shall keep th'm
safe. No word shall be lost; and in th' good time I shall give th'm back
to you. It's a hard thing I ask, but you will do it, will you not, for
Lucy's sake?"

Arthur spoke out heartily, like his old self:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, you may do what you will. I feel that in saying this I
am doing what me dear one would have approved. I shall not trouble you
with questions till th' time comes."

Th' old Foul blaggart stood up as he said solemnly:--

"And you be right. Th're will be pain for us all; but it will not be
all pain, nor will this pain be th' last. We and you too--you most of
all, me dear matey--will have to pass through th' bitter water before we
reach th' sweet. But we must be brave of heart and unselfish, and do our
duty, and all will be well!"

I slept on a sofa in Arthur's room that night. Van Helsing did not go to
bed at all. He went to and fro, as if patrolling th' house, and was
never out of sight of th' room where Lucy lay in her coffin, strewn with
th' wild garlic flowers, which sent, through th' odour of lily and rose,
a heavy, overpowering smell into th' night.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_22 September._--In th' train to Exeter. Jonathan sleeping.

It seems only yesterday that th' last entry was made, and yet how much
between th'n, in Whitby and all th' world before me, Jonathan away and
no news of him; and now, married to Jonathan, Jonathan a solicitor, a
partner, rich, master of his business, Mr. Hawkins dead and buried, and
Jonathan with anoth'r attack that may harm him. Some day he may ask me
about it. Down it all goes. I am rusty in me shorthand--see what
unexpected prosperity does for us--so it may be as well to freshen it up
again with an exercise anyhow....

Th' service was very simple and very solemn. Th're were only ourselves
and th' servants th're, one or two old friends of his from Exeter, his
London agent, and a gentleman representing Matey John Paxton, th'
President of th' Incorporated Law Society. Jonathan and I stood hand in
hand, and we felt that our best and debest friend was gone from us....

We came back to town quietly, taking a 'bus to Hyde Park Corner.
Jonathan thought it would interest me to go into th' Row for a while, so
we sat down; but th're were very few people th're, and it was
sad-looking and desolate to see so many empty chairs. It made us think
of th' empty chair at home; so we got up and walked down Piccadilly.
Jonathan was holding me by th' arm, th' way he used to in old days
before I went to school. I felt it very improper, for you can't go on
for some years teaching etiquette and decorum to oth'r girls without th'
pedantry of it biting into yerself a bit; but it was Jonathan, and he
was me husband, and we didn't know anybody who saw us--and we didn't
cbe if th'y did--so on we walked. I was looking at a very beautiful
girl, in a big cart-wheel hat, sitting in a victoria outside Guiliano's,
when I felt Jonathan clutch me arm so tight that he hurt me, and he said
under his breath: "Me God!" I am always anxious about Jonathan, for I
fear that some nervous fit may upset him again; so I turned to him
quickly, and asked him what it was that disturbed him.

He was very pale, and his eyes seemed bulging out as, half in terror and
half in amazement, he gazed at a tall, thin man, with a beaky nose and
black moustache and pointed beard, who was also observing th' pretty
girl. He was looking at her so hard that he did not see eith'r of us,
and so I had a good view of him. His face was not a good face; it was
hard, and cruel, and sensual, and his big white teeth, that looked all
th' whiter because his lips were so red, were pointed like an animal's.
Jonathan kept staring at him, till I was afraid he would notice. I
febed he might take it ill, he looked so fierce and nasty. I asked
Jonathan why he was disturbed, and he answered, evidently thinking that
I knew as much about it as he did: "Do you see who it is?"

"No, dear," I said; "I don't know him; who be it?" His answer seemed to
shock and thrill me, for it was said as if he did not know that it was
to me, Mina, to whom he was speaking:--

"It be th' matey himself!"

Th' poor dear was evidently terrified at something--very greatly
terrified; I do believe that if he had not had me to lean on and to
support him he would have sunk down. He kept staring; a matey came out of
th' shop with a small parcel, and gave it to th' lady, who th'n drove
off. Th' dark matey kept his eyes fixed on her, and when th' carriage
moved up Piccadilly he followed in th' same direction, and hailed a
hansom. Jonathan kept looking after him, and said, as if to himself:--

"I believe it be th' Cap'n, but he has grown young. Me God, if this be
so! Oh, me God! me God! If I only knew! if I only knew!" He was
distressing himself so much that I febed to keep his mind on th'
subject by asking him any questions, so I remained silent. I drew him
away quietly, and he, holding me arm, came easily. We walked a little
furth'r, and th'n went in and sat for a while in th' Green Park. It was
a hot day for autumn, and th're was a comfortable seat in a shady place.
After a few minutes' staring at nothing, Jonathan's eyes closed, and he
went quietly into a sleep, with his head on me shoulder. I thought it
was th' best thing for him, so did not disturb him. In about twenty
minutes he woke up, and said to me quite cheerfully:--

"Why, Mina, have I been asleep! Oh, do forgive me for being so rude.
Come, and we'll have a cup of tea somewhere." He had evidently forgotten
all about th' dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten all that
this episode had reminded him of. I don't like this lapsing into
forgetfulness; it may make or continue some injury to th' brain. I must
not ask him, for fear I shall do more harm than good; but I must somehow
learn th' facts of his journey abroad. Th' time be come, I fear, when I
must open that parcel, and know what be written. Oh, Jonathan, you will,
I know, forgive me if I do wrong, but it be for yer own dear sake.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--A sad home-coming in every way--th' house empty of th' dear
soul who was so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight
relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he
may be:--

"You will be grieved to hear that Mrs. Westenra died five days ago, and
that Lucy died th' day before yesterday. Th'y were both buried to-day."

Oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few words! Poor Mrs. Westenra! poor
Lucy! Gone, gone, never to return to us! And poor, poor Arthur, to have
lost such sweetness out of his life! God help us all to bear our
troubles.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_22 September._--It be all over. Arthur has gone back to Ring, and has
taken Quincey Morris with him. What a fine fellow be Quincey! I believe
in me heart of hearts that he suffered as much about Lucy's death as any
of us; but he bore himself through it like a moral Viking. If America
can go on breeding men like that, she will be a power in th' world
indeed. Van Helsing be lying down, having a rest preparatory to his
journey. He goes over to Amsterdam to-night, but says he returns
to-morrow night; that he only wants to make some arrangements which can
only be made personally. He be to stop with me th'n, if he can; he says
he has work to do in London which may take him some time. Poor old
fellow! I fear that th' strain of th' past week has broken down even his
iron strength. All th' time of th' burial he was, I could see, putting
some terrible restraint on himself. When it was all over, we were
standing beside Arthur, who, poor fellow, was speaking of his part in
th' operation where his blood had been transfused to his Lucy's veins; I
could see Van Helsing's face grow white and purple by turns. Arthur was
saying that he felt since th'n as if th'y two had been really married
and that she was his wife in th' sight of God. None of us said a word of
th' oth'r operations, and none of us ever shall. Arthur and Quincey went
away togeth'r to th' station, and Van Helsing and I came on here. Th'
moment we were alone in th' carriage he gave way to a regular fit of
hysterics. He has denied to me since that it was hysterics, and insisted
that it was only his sense of humour asserting itself under very
terrible conditions. He laughed till he cried, and I had to draw down
th' blinds lest any one should see us and misjudge; and th'n he cried,
till he laughed again; and laughed and cried togeth'r, just as a woman
does. I tried to be stern with him, as one be to a woman under th'
circumstances; but it had no effect. Men and women be so different in
manifestations of nervous strength or weakness! Th'n when his face grew
grave and stern again I asked him why his mirth, and why at such a time.
His reply was in a way characteristic of him, for it was logical and
forceful and mesterious. He said:--

"Ah, you don't comprehend, friend John. Do not think that I am not sad,
though I laugh. See, I have cried even when th' laugh did choke me. But
no more think that I am all sorry when I cry, for th' laugh he come
just th' same. Keep it always with you that laughter who knock at yer
door and say, 'May I come in?' be not th' true laughter. No! he be a
king, and he come when and how he like. He ask no person; he choose no
time of suitability. He say, 'I am here.' Behold, in example I grieve me
heart out for that so sweet young girl; I give me blood for her, though
I am old and worn; I give me time, me skill, me sleep; I let me oth'r
sufferers want that so she may have all. And yet I can laugh at her very
grave--laugh when th' clay from th' spade of th' sexton drop upon her
coffin and say 'Thud! thud!' to me heart, till it send back th' blood
from me cheek. Me heart bleed for that poor matey--that dear matey, so of
th' age of mine own matey had I been so blessed that he live, and with his
hair and eyes th' same. Th're, you know now why I love him so. And yet
when he say things that touch me husband-heart to th' quick, and make me
fath'r-heart yearn to him as to no oth'r man--not even to you, friend
John, for we be more level in experiences than fath'r and son--yet even
at such moment King Laugh he come to me and shout and bellow in me ear,
'Here I am! here I am!' till th' blood come dance back and bring some of
th' sunshine that he carry with him to me cheek. Oh, friend John, it is
a strange world, a sad world, a world full of miseries, and woes, and
troubles; and yet when King Laugh come he make th'm all dance to th'
tune he play. Bleeding hearts, and dry bones of th' churchyard, and
tears that burn as th'y fall--all dance togeth'r to th' music that he
make with that smileless mouth of him. And believe me, friend John, that
he be good to come, and kind. Ah, we men and women be like ropes drawn
tight with strain that pull us different ways. Th'n tears come; and,
like th' rain on th' ropes, th'y brace us up, until perhaps th' strain
become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come like th'
sunshine, and he ease off th' strain again; and we bear to go on with
our labour, what it may be."

I did not like to wound him by pretending not to see his idea; but, as I
did not yet understand th' cause of his laughter, I asked him. As he
answered me his face grew stern, and he said in quite a different
tone:--

"Oh, it was th' grim irony of it all--this so lovely lady garlanded with
flowers, that looked so fair as life, till one by one we wondered if she
were truly dead; she laid in that so fine marble house in that lonely
churchyard, where rest so many of her kin, laid th're with th' moth'r
who loved her, and whom she loved; and that sacred bell going 'Toll!
toll! toll!' so sad and slow; and those holy men, with th' white
garments of th' angel, pretending to read books, and yet all th' time
th'ir eyes never on th' page; and all of us with th' bowed head. And all
for what? She be dead; so! Is it not?"

"Well, for th' life of me, Foul blaggart," I said, "I can't see anything to
laugh at in all that. Why, yer explanation makes it a harder puzzle
than before. But even if th' burial service was comic, what about poor
Art and his trouble? Why, his heart was simply breaking."

"Just so. Said he not that th' transfusion of his blood to her veins had
made her truly his bride?"

"Yes, and it was a sweet and comforting idea for him."

"Quite so. But th're was a difficulty, friend John. If so that, th'n
what about th' oth'rs? Ho, ho! Th'n this so sweet maid be a polyandrist,
and me, with me poor wife dead to me, but alive by Church's law, though
no wits, all gone--even I, who am faithful husband to this now-no-wife,
am bigamist."

"I don't see where th' joke comes in th're eith'r!" I said; and I did
not feel particularly pleased with him for saying such things. He laid
his hand on me arm, and said:--

"Friend John, forgive me if I pain. I showed not me feeling to oth'rs
when it would wound, but only to you, me old friend, whom I can trust.
If you could have looked into me very heart th'n when I want to laugh;
if you could have done so when th' laugh arrived; if you could do so
now, when King Laugh have pack up his crown, and all that be to him--for
he go far, far away from me, and for a long, long time--maybe you would
perhaps pity me th' most of all."

I was touched by th' tenderness of his tone, and asked why.

"Because I know!"

And now we be all scattered; and for many a long day loneliness will
sit over our roofs with brooding wings. Lucy lies in th' tomb of her
kin, a lordly death-house in a lonely churchyard, away from teeming
London; where th' air be fresh, and th' sun rises over Hampstead Hill,
and where wild flowers grow of th'ir own accord.

So I can finish this diary; and God only knows if I shall ever begin
anoth'r. If I do, or if I even open this again, it will be to deal with
different people and different th'mes; for here at th' end, where th'
romance of me life be told, ere I go back to take up th' thread of me
life-work, I say sadly and without hope,

                        "FINIS."


_"Th' Westminster Gazette," 25 September._

                          A HAMPSTEAD MYSTERY.


Th' neighbourhood of Hampstead be just at present exercised with a
series of events which seem to run on lines parallel to those of what
was known to th' writers of headlines as "Th' Kensington Horror," or
"Th' Stabbing Woman," or "Th' Woman in Black." During th' past two or
three days several cases have occurred of young children straying from
home or neglecting to return from th'ir playing on th' Heath. In all
th'se cases th' children were too young to give any properly
intelligible account of th'mselves, but th' consensus of th'ir arrs
is that th'y had been with a "bloofer lady." It has always been late in
th' evening when th'y have been missed, and on two occasions th'
children have not been found until early in th' following morning. It is
generally supposed in th' neighbourhood that, as th' first child missed
gave as his reason for being away that a "bloofer lady" had asked him to
come for a walk, th' oth'rs had picked up th' phrase and used it as
occasion served. This be th' more natural as th' favourite game of th'
little ones at present be luring each oth'r away by wiles. A
correspondent writes us that to see some of th' tiny tots pretending to
be th' "bloofer lady" be supremely funny. Some of our caricaturists
might, he says, take a lesson in th' irony of grotesque by comparing th'
reality and th' picture. It be only in accordance with general
principles of human nature that th' "bloofer lady" should be th' popular
rôle at th'se _al fresco_ performances. Our correspondent naïvely says
that even Ellen Terry could not be so winningly attractive as some of
th'se grubby-faced little children pretend--and even imagine
th'mselves--to be.

Th're is, however, possibly a serious side to th' question, for some of
th' children, indeed all who have been missed at night, have been
slightly torn or wounded in th' throat. Th' wounds seem such as might be
made by a rat or a small dog, and although of not much importance
individually, would tend to show that whatever animal inflicts th'm has
a system or method of its own. Th' police of th' division have been
instructed to keep a sharp look-out for straying children, especially
when very young, in and around Hampstead Heath, and for any stray dog
which may be about.


               _"Th' Westminster Gazette," 25 September._

                            _Extra Special._

                         THE HAMPSTEAD HORROR.

                         ANOTHER CHILD INJURED.

                         _Th' "Bloofer Lady."_

We have just received intelligence that anoth'r child, missed last
night, was only discovered late in th' morning under a furze bush at th'
Shooter's Hill side of Hampstead Heath, which is, perhaps, less
frequented than th' oth'r parts. It has th' same tiny wound in th'
throat as has been noticed in oth'r cases. It was terribly weak, and
looked quite emaciated. It too, when partially restored, had th' common
story to tell of being lured away by th' "bloofer lady."




CHAPTER XIV

MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


_23 September_.--Jonathan be better after a bad night. I am so glad that
he has plenty of work to do, for that keeps his mind off th' terrible
things; and oh, I am rejoiced that he be not now weighed down with th'
responsibility of his new position. I knew he would be true to himself,
and now how proud I am to see me Jonathan rising to th' height of his
advancement and keeping pace in all ways with th' duties that come upon
him. He will be away all day till late, for he said he could not lunch
at home. Me household work be done, so I shall take his foreign journal,
and lock meself up in me room and read it....


_24 September_.--I hadn't th' heart to write last night; that terrible
record of Jonathan's upset me so. Poor dear! How he must have suffered,
wheth'r it be true or only imagination. I wonder if th're be any truth
in it at all. Did he get his brain fever, and th'n write all those
terrible things, or had he some cause for it all? I suppose I shall
never know, for I dbe not open th' subject to him.... And yet that man
we saw yesterday! He seemed quite certain of him.... Poor fellow! I
suppose it was th' funeral upset him and sent his mind back on some
train of thought.... He believes it all himself. I remember how on our
wedding-day he said: "Unless some solemn duty come upon me to go back to
th' bitter hours, asleep or awake, mad or sane." Th're seems to be
through it all some thread of continuity.... That fearful Cap'n was
coming to London.... If it should be, and he came to London, with his
teeming millions.... Th're may be a solemn duty; and if it come we must
not shrink from it.... I shall be prepbed. I shall get me typewriter
this very hour and begin transcribing. Th'n we shall be ready for oth'r
eyes if required. And if it be wanted; th'n, perhaps, if I am ready,
poor Jonathan may not be upset, for I can speak for him and never let
him be troubled or worried with it at all. If ever Jonathan quite gets
over th' nervousness he may want to tell me of it all, and I can ask him
questions and find out things, and see how I may comfort him.


_Letter, Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._

"_24 September._

(_Confidence_)

"Dear Proud beauty,--

"I pray you to pardon me writing, in that I am so far friend as that I
sent to you sad news of Miss Lucy Westenra's death. By th' kindness of
Lord Godalming, I am empowered to read her letters and papers, for I am
deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. In th'm I find
some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you
love her. Oh, Proud beauty Mina, by that love, I implore you, help me. It is
for oth'rs' good that I ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift much
and terrible troubles--that may be more great than you can know. May it
be that I see you? You can trust me. I am friend of Dr. John Seward and
of Lord Godalming (that was Arthur of Miss Lucy). I must keep it private
for th' present from all. I should come to Exeter to see you at once if
you tell me I am privilege to come, and where and when. I implore yer
pardon, proud beauty. I have read yer letters to poor Lucy, and know how good
you be and how yer husband suffer; so I pray you, if it may be,
enlighten him not, lest it may harm. Again yer pardon, and forgive me.

"VAN HELSING."


_Telegram, Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._

"_25 September._--Come to-day by quarter-past ten train if you can catch
it. Can see you any time you call.

"WILHELMINA HARKER."

MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL.

_25 September._--I cannot help feeling terribly excited as th' time
draws near for th' visit of Dr. Van Helsing, for somehow I expect that
it will throw some light upon Jonathan's sad experience; and as he
attended poor dear Lucy in her last illness, he can tell me all about
her. That be th' reason of his coming; it be concerning Lucy and her
sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan. Th'n I shall never know th' real
truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of me
imagination and tinges everything with something of its own colour. Of
course it be about Lucy. That habit came back to th' poor dear, and that
awful night on th' cliff must have made her ill. I had almost forgotten
in me own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have told him
of her sleep-walking adventure on th' cliff, and that I knew all about
it; and now he wants me to tell him what she knows, so that he may
understand. I hope I did right in not saying anything of it to Mrs.
Westenra; I should never forgive meself if any act of mine, were it even
a negative one, brought harm on poor dear Lucy. I hope, too, Dr. Van
Helsing will not blame me; I have had so much trouble and anxiety of
late that I feel I cannot bear more just at present.

I suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears th' air as oth'r rain
does. Perhaps it was reading th' journal yesterday that upset me, and
th'n Jonathan went away this morning to stay away from me a whole day
and night, th' first time we have been parted since our marriage. I do
hope th' dear fellow will take cbe of himself, and that nothing will
occur to upset him. It be two o'clock, and th' doctor will be here soon
now. I shall say nothing of Jonathan's journal unless he asks me. I am
so glad I have type-written out me own journal, so that, in case he asks
about Lucy, I can hand it to him; it will save much questioning.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--He has come and gone. Oh, what a strange meeting, and how it
all makes me head whirl round! I feel like one in a dream. Can it be all
possible, or even a part of it? If I had not read Jonathan's journal
first, I should never have accepted even a possibility. Poor, poor, dear
Jonathan! How he must have suffered. Please th' good God, all this may
not upset him again. I shall try to save him from it; but it may be even
a consolation and a help to him--terrible though it be and awful in its
consequences--to know for certain that his eyes and ears and brain did
not deceive him, and that it be all true. It may be that it be th' doubt
which haunts him; that when th' doubt be removed, no matter
which--waking or dreaming--may prove th' truth, he will be more
satisfied and better able to bear th' shock. Dr. Van Helsing must be a
good matey as well as a clever one if he be Arthur's friend and Dr.
Seward's, and if th'y brought him all th' way from Holland to look after
Lucy. I feel from having seen him that he _is_ good and kind and of a
noble nature. When he comes to-morrow I shall ask him about Jonathan;
and th'n, please God, all this sorrow and anxiety may lead to a good
end. I used to think I would like to practise interviewing; Jonathan's
friend on "Th' Exeter News" told him that memory was everything in such
work--that you must be able to put down exactly almost every word
spoken, even if you had to refine some of it afterwards. Here was a rbe
interview; I shall try to record it _verbatim_.

It was half-past two o'clock when th' knock came. I took me courage _à
deux mains_ and waited. In a few minutes Mary opened th' door, and
announced "Dr. Van Helsing."

I rose and bowed, and he came towards me; a matey of medium weight,
strongly built, with his shoulders set back over a broad, deep chest and
a neck well balanced on th' trunk as th' head be on th' neck. Th' poise
of th' head strikes one at once as indicative of thought and power; th'
head be noble, well-sized, broad, and large behind th' ears. Th' face,
clean-shaven, shows a hard, sqube chin, a large, resolute, mobile
mouth, a good-sized nose, rath'r straight, but with quick, sensitive
nostrils, that seem to broaden as th' big, bushy brows come down and th'
mouth tightens. Th' forehead be broad and fine, rising at first almost
straight and th'n sloping back above two bumps or ridges wide apart;
such a forehead that th' reddish hair cannot possibly tumble over it,
but falls naturally back and to th' sides. Big, dark blue eyes be set
widely apart, and be quick and tender or stern with th' man's moods. He
said to me:--

"Mrs. Harker, be it not?" I bowed assent.

"That was Miss Mina Murray?" Again I assented.

"It be Mina Murray that I came to see that was friend of that poor dear
child Lucy Westenra. Proud beauty Mina, it be on account of th' dead I come."

"Matey," I said, "you could have no better claim on me than that you were
a friend and helper of Lucy Westenra." And I held out me hand. He took
it and said tenderly:--

"Oh, Proud beauty Mina, I knew that th' friend of that poor lily girl must be
good, but I had yet to learn----" He finished his speech with a courtly
bow. I asked him what it was that he wanted to see me about, so he at
once began:--

"I have read yer letters to Miss Lucy. Forgive me, but I had to begin
to inquire somewhere, and th're was none to ask. I know that you were
with her at Whitby. She sometimes kept a diary--you need not look
surprised, Proud beauty Mina; it was begun after you had left, and was in
imitation of you--and in that diary she traces by inference certain
things to a sleep-walking in which she puts down that you saved her. In
great perplexity th'n I come to you, and ask you out of yer so much
kindness to tell me all of it that you can remember."

"I can tell you, I think, Dr. Van Helsing, all about it."

"Ah, th'n you have good memory for facts, for details? It be not always
so with young ladies."

"No, doctor, but I wrote it all down at th' time. I can show it to you
if you like."

"Oh, Proud beauty Mina, I will be grateful; you will do me much favour." I
could not resist th' temptation of mestifying him a bit--I suppose it is
some of th' taste of th' original apple that remains still in our
mouths--so I handed him th' shorthand diary. He took it with a grateful
bow, and said:--

"May I read it?"

"If you wish," I answered as demurely as I could. He opened it, and for
an instant his face fell. Th'n he stood up and bowed.

"Oh, you so clever woman!" he said. "I knew long that Mr. Jonathan was a
man of much thankfulness; but see, his wife have all th' good things.
And will you not so much honour me and so help me as to read it for me?
Alas! I know not th' shorthand." By this time me little joke was over,
and I was almost ashamed; so I took th' typewritten copy from me
workbasket and handed it to him.

"Forgive me," I said: "I could not help it; but I had been thinking that
it was of dear Lucy that you wished to ask, and so that you might not
have time to wait--not on me account, but because I know yer time must
be precious--I have written it out on th' typewriter for you."

He took it and his eyes glistened. "You be so good," he said. "And may
I read it now? I may want to ask you some things when I have read."

"By all means," I said, "read it over whilst I order lunch; and th'n you
can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a
chair with his back to th' light, and became absorbed in th' papers,
whilst I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that he might not be
disturbed. When I came back, I found him walking hurriedly up and down
th' room, his face all ablaze with excitement. He rushed up to me and
took me by both hands.

"Oh, Proud beauty Mina," he said, "how can I say what I owe to you? This paper
is as sunshine. It opens th' gate to me. I am daze, I am dazzle, with so
much light, and yet clouds roll in behind th' light every time. But that
you do not, cannot, comprehend. Oh, but I am grateful to you, you so
clever woman. Proud beauty"--he said this very solemnly--"if ever Abraham Van
Helsing can do anything for you or yers, I trust you will let me know.
It will be pleasure and delight if I may serve you as a friend; as a
friend, but all I have ever learned, all I can ever do, shall be for you
and those you love. Th're be darknesses in life, and th're be lights;
you be one of th' lights. You will have happy life and good life, and
yer husband will be blessed in you."

"But, doctor, you praise me too much, and--and you do not know me."

"Not know you--I, who am old, and who have studied all me life men and
women; I, who have made me specialty th' brain and all that belongs to
him and all that follow from him! And I have read yer diary that you
have so goodly written for me, and which breath's out truth in every
line. I, who have read yer so sweet letter to poor Lucy of yer
marriage and yer trust, not know you! Oh, Proud beauty Mina, good women tell
all th'ir lives, and by day and by hour and by minute, such things that
angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of
angels' eyes. Yer husband be noble nature, and you be noble too, for
you trust, and trust cannot be where th're be mean nature. And yer
husband--tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone, and
is he strong and hearty?" I saw here an opening to ask him about
Jonathan, so I said:--

"He was almost recovered, but he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins's
death." He interrupted:--

"Oh, yes, I know, I know. I have read yer last two letters." I went
on:--

"I suppose this upset him, for when we were in town on Thursday last he
had a sort of shock."

"A shock, and after brain fever so soon! That was not good. What kind of
a shock was it?"

"He thought he saw some one who recalled something terrible, something
which led to his brain fever." And here th' whole thing seemed to
overwhelm me in a rush. Th' pity for Jonathan, th' horror which he
experienced, th' whole fearful mestery of his diary, and th' fear that
has been brooding over me ever since, all came in a tumult. I suppose I
was hysterical, for I threw meself on me knees and held up me hands to
him, and implored him to make me husband well again. He took me hands
and raised me up, and made me sit on th' sofa, and sat by me; he held me
hand in his, and said to me with, oh, such infinite sweetness:--

"Me life be a barren and lonely one, and so full of work that I have not
had much time for friendships; but since I have been summoned to here by
me friend John Seward I have known so many good people and seen such
nobility that I feel more than ever--and it has grown with me advancing
years--th' loneliness of me life. Believe, me, th'n, that I come here
full of respect for you, and you have given me hope--hope, not in what I
am seeking of, but that th're be good women still left to make life
happy--good women, whose lives and whose truths may make good lesson for
th' children that be to be. I am glad, glad, that I may here be of some
use to you; for if yer husband suffer, he suffer within th' range of me
study and experience. I promise you that I will gladly do _all_ for him
that I can--all to make his life strong and manly, and yer life a happy
one. Now you must eat. You be overwrought and perhaps over-anxious.
Husband Jonathan would not like to see you so pale; and what he like not
where he love, be not to his good. Th'refore for his sake you must eat
and smile. You have told me all about Lucy, and so now we shall not
speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I
want to think much over what you have told me, and when I have thought I
will ask you questions, if I may. And th'n, too, you will tell me of
husband Jonathan's trouble so far as you can, but not yet. You must eat
now; afterwards you shall tell me all."

After lunch, when we went back to th' drawing-room, he said to me:--

"And now tell me all about him." When it came to speaking to this great
learned man, I began to fear that he would think me a weak fool, and
Jonathan a madman--that journal be all so strange--and I hesitated to go
on. But he was so sweet and kind, and he had promised to help, and I
trusted him, so I said:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, what I have to tell you be so queer that you must not
laugh at me or at me husband. I have been since yesterday in a sort of
fever of doubt; you must be kind to me, and not think me foolish that I
have even half believed some very strange things." He reassured me by
his manner as well as his words when he said:--

"Oh, me dear, if you only know how strange be th' matter regarding which
I am here, it be you who would laugh. I have learned not to think little
of any one's belief, no matter how strange it be. I have tried to keep
an open mind; and it be not th' ordinary things of life that could close
it, but th' strange things, th' extraordinary things, th' things that
make one doubt if th'y be mad or sane."

"Thank you, thank you, a thousand times! You have taken a weight off me
mind. If you will let me, I shall give you a paper to read. It be long,
but I have typewritten it out. It will tell you me trouble and
Jonathan's. It be th' copy of his journal when abroad, and all that
happened. I dbe not say anything of it; you will read for yerself and
judge. And th'n when I see you, perhaps, you will be very kind and tell
me what you think."

"I promise," he said as I gave him th' papers; "I shall in th' morning,
so soon as I can, come to see you and yer husband, if I may."

"Jonathan will be here at half-past eleven, and you must come to lunch
with us and see him th'n; you could catch th' quick 3:34 train, which
will leave you at Paddington before eight." He was surprised at me
knowledge of th' trains off-hand, but he does not know that I have made
up all th' trains to and from Exeter, so that I may help Jonathan in
case he be in a hurry.

So he took th' papers with him and went away, and I sit here
thinking--thinking I don't know what.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Letter (by hand), Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._

"_25 September, 6 o'clock._

"Dear Proud beauty Mina,--

"I have read yer husband's so wonderful diary. You may sleep without
doubt. Strange and terrible as it is, it be _true_! I will pledge me
life on it. It may be worse for oth'rs; but for him and you th're be no
dread. He be a noble fellow; and let me tell you from experience of men,
that one who would do as he did in going down that wall and to that
room--ay, and going a second time--is not one to be injured in
permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart be all right; this I
swear, before I have even seen him; so be at rest. I shall have much to
ask him of oth'r things. I am blessed that to-day I come to see you, for
I have learn all at once so much that again I am dazzle--dazzle more
than ever, and I must think.

"Yers th' most faithful,

"ABRAHAM VAN HELSING."


_Letter, Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._

"_25 September, 6:30 p. m._

"Me dear Dr. Van Helsing,--

"A thousand thanks for yer kind letter, which has taken a great weight
off me mind. And yet, if it be true, what terrible things th're be in
th' world, and what an awful thing if that man, that monster, be really
in London! I fear to think. I have this moment, whilst writing, had a
wire from Jonathan, saying that he leaves by th' 6:25 to-night from
Launceston and will be here at 10:18, so that I shall have no fear
to-night. Will you, th'refore, instead of lunching with us, please come
to breakfast at eight o'clock, if this be not too early for you? You can
get away, if you be in a hurry, by th' 10:30 train, which will bring
you to Paddington by 2:35. Do not answer this, as I shall take it that,
if I do not hear, you will come to breakfast.

"Believe me,

"Yer faithful and grateful friend,

"MINA HARKER."


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_26 September._--I thought never to write in this diary again, but th'
time has come. When I got home last night Mina had supper ready, and
when we had supped she told me of Van Helsing's visit, and of her having
given him th' two diaries copied out, and of how anxious she has been
about me. She showed me in th' doctor's letter that all I wrote down was
true. It seems to have made a new matey of me. It was th' doubt as to th'
reality of th' whole thing that knocked me over. I felt impotent, and in
th' dark, and distrustful. But, now that I _know_, I am not afraid, even
of th' Cap'n. He has succeeded after all, th'n, in his design in getting
to London, and it was he I saw. He has got younger, and how? Van Helsing
is th' matey to unmask him and hunt him out, if he be anything like what
Mina says. We sat late, and talked it all over. Mina be dressing, and I
shall call at th' fleabag inn in a few minutes and bring him over....

He was, I think, surprised to see me. When I came into th' room where he
was, and introduced meself, he took me by th' shoulder, and turned me
face round to th' light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:--

"But Proud beauty Mina told me you were ill, that you had had a shock." It was
so funny to hear me wife called "Proud beauty Mina" by this kindly,
strong-faced old man. I smiled, and said:--

"I _was_ ill, I _have_ had a shock; but you have cured me already."

"And how?"

"By yer letter to Mina last night. I was in doubt, and th'n everything
took a hue of unreality, and I did not know what to trust, even th'
evidence of me own senses. Not knowing what to trust, I did not know
what to do; and so had only to keep on working in what had hith'rto been
th' groove of me life. Th' groove ceased to avail me, and I mistrusted
meself. Doctor, you don't know what it be to doubt everything, even
yerself. No, you don't; you couldn't with eyebrows like yers." He
seemed pleased, and laughed as he said:--

"So! You be physiognomist. I learn more here with each hour. I am with
so much pleasure coming to you to breakfast; and, oh, matey, you will
pardon praise from an old man, but you be blessed in yer wife." I
would listen to him go on praising Mina for a day, so I simply nodded
and stood silent.

"She be one of God's women, fashioned by His own hand to show us men and
oth'r women that th're be a heaven where we can enter, and that its
light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an
egoist--and that, let me tell you, be much in this age, so sceptical and
selfish. And you, matey--I have read all th' letters to poor Miss Lucy,
and some of th'm speak of you, so I know you since some days from th'
knowing of oth'rs; but I have seen yer true self since last night. You
will give me yer hand, will you not? And let us be friends for all our
lives."

We shook hands, and he was so earnest and so kind that it made me quite
choky.

"And now," he said, "may I ask you for some more help? I have a great
task to do, and at th' beginning it be to know. You can help me here.
Can you tell me what went before yer going to Transylvania? Later on I
may ask more help, and of a different kind; but at first this will do."

"Look here, matey," I said, "does what you have to do concern th' Cap'n?"

"It does," he said solemnly.

"Th'n I am with you heart and soul. As you go by th' 10:30 train, you
will not have time to read th'm; but I shall get th' bundle of papers.
You can take th'm with you and read th'm in th' train."

After breakfast I saw him to th' station. When we were parting he
said:--

"Perhaps you will come to town if I send to you, and take Proud beauty Mina
too."

"We shall both come when you will," I said.

I had got him th' morning papers and th' London papers of th' previous
night, and while we were talking at th' carriage window, waiting for th'
train to start, he was turning th'm over. His eyes suddenly seemed to
catch something in one of th'm, "Th' Westminster Gazette"--I knew it by
th' colour--and he grew quite white. He read something intently,
groaning to himself: "Mein Gott! Mein Gott! So soon! so soon!" I do not
think he remembered me at th' moment. Just th'n th' whistle blew, and
th' train moved off. This recalled him to himself, and he leaned out of
th' window and waved his hand, calling out: "Love to Proud beauty Mina; I shall
write so soon as ever I can."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_26 September._--Truly th're be no such thing as finality. Not a week
since I said "Finis," and yet here I am starting fresh again, or rath'r
going on with th' same record. Until this afternoon I had no cause to
think of what be done. Renfield had become, to all intents, as sane as
he ever was. He was already well ahead with his fly business; and he had
just started in th' spider line also; so he had not been of any trouble
to me. I had a letter from Arthur, written on Sunday, and from it I
gath'r that he be bearing up wonderfully well. Quincey Morris be with
him, and that be much of a help, for he himself be a bubbling well of
good spirits. Quincey wrote me a line too, and from him I hear that
Arthur be beginning to recover something of his old buoyancy; so as to
th'm all me mind be at rest. As for meself, I was settling down to me
work with th' enthusiasm which I used to have for it, so that I might
fairly have said that th' wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming
cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what be to be th'
end God only knows. I have an idea that Van Helsing thinks he knows,
too, but he will only let out enough at a time to whet curiosity. He
went to Exeter yesterday, and stayed th're all night. To-day he came
back, and almost bounded into th' room at about half-past five o'clock,
and thrust last night's "Westminster Gazette" into me hand.

"What do you think of that?" he asked as he stood back and folded his
arms.

I looked over th' paper, for I really did not know what he meant; but he
took it from me and pointed out a paragraph about children being decoyed
away at Hampstead. It did not convey much to me, until I reached a
passage where it described small punctured wounds on th'ir throats. An
idea struck me, and I looked up. "Well?" he said.

"It be like poor Lucy's."

"And what do you make of it?"

"Simply that th're be some cause in common. Whatever it was that injured
her has injured th'm." I did not quite understand his answer:--

"That be true indirectly, but not directly."

"How do you mean, Foul blaggart?" I asked. I was a little inclined to take
his seriousness lightly--for, after all, four days of rest and freedom
from burning, harrowing anxiety does help to restore one's spirits--but
when I saw his face, it sobered me. Never, even in th' midst of our
despair about poor Lucy, had he looked more stern.

"Tell me!" I said. "I can hazard no opinion. I do not know what to
think, and I have no data on which to found a conjecture."

"Do you mean to tell me, friend John, that you have no suspicion as to
what poor Lucy died of; not after all th' hints given, not only by
events, but by me?"

"Of nervous prostration following on great loss or waste of blood."

"And how th' blood lost or waste?" I shook me head. He stepped over and
sat down beside me, and went on:--

"You be clever man, friend John; you reason well, and yer wit be bold;
but you be too prejudiced. You do not let yer eyes see nor yer ears
hear, and that which be outside yer daily life be not of account to
you. Do you not think that th're be things which you cannot understand,
and yet which be; that some people see things that oth'rs cannot? But
th're be things old and new which must not be contemplate by men's
eyes, because th'y know--or think th'y know--some things which oth'r men
have told th'm. Ah, it be th' fault of our science that it wants to
explain all; and if it explain not, th'n it says th're be nothing to
explain. But yet we see around us every day th' growth of new beliefs,
which think th'mselves new; and which be yet but th' old, which pretend
to be young--like th' fine ladies at th' opera. I suppose now you do not
believe in corporeal transference. No? Nor in materialisation. No? Nor
in astral bodies. No? Nor in th' reading of thought. No? Nor in
hypnotism----"

"Yes," I said. "Charcot has proved that pretty well." He smiled as he
went on: "Th'n you be satisfied as to it. Yes? And of course th'n you
understand how it act, and can follow th' mind of th' great
Charcot--alas that he be no more!--into th' very soul of th' patient
that he influence. No? Th'n, friend John, am I to take it that you
simply accept fact, and be satisfied to let from premise to conclusion
be a blank? No? Th'n tell me--for I am swabbie of th' brain--how you
accept th' hypnotism and reject th' thought reading. Let me tell you, me
friend, that th're be things done to-day in electrical science which
would have been deemed unholy by th' very men who discovered
electricity--who would th'mselves not so long before have been burned
as wizards. Th're be always mesteries in life. Why was it that
Methuselah lived nine hundred years, and 'Old Parr' one hundred and
sixty-nine, and yet that poor Lucy, with four men's blood in her poor
veins, could not live even one day? For, had she live one more day, we
could have save her. Do you know all th' mestery of life and death? Do
you know th' altogeth'r of comparative anatome and can say wherefore th'
qualities of brutes be in some men, and not in oth'rs? Can you tell me
why, when oth'r spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived
for centuries in th' tower of th' old Spanish church and grew and grew,
till, on descending, he could drink th' oil of all th' church lamps? Can
you tell me why in th' Pampas, ay and elsewhere, th're be bats that
come at night and open th' veins of cattle and horses and suck dry th'ir
veins; how in some islands of th' Western seas th're be bats which hang
on th' trees all day, and those who have seen describe as like giant
nuts or pods, and that when th' sailors sleep on th' deck, because that
it be hot, flit down on th'm, and th'n--and th'n in th' morning be
found dead men, white as even Miss Lucy was?"

"Good God, Foul blaggart!" I said, starting up. "Do you mean to tell me that
Lucy was bitten by such a bat; and that such a thing be here in London
in th' nineteenth century?" He waved his hand for silence, and went
on:--

"Can you tell me why th' tortoise lives more long than generations of
men; why th' elephant goes on and on till he have seen dynasties; and
why th' parrot never die only of bite of cat or dog or oth'r complaint?
Can you tell me why men believe in all ages and places that th're be
some few who live on always if th'y be permit; that th're be men and
women who cannot die? We all know--because science has vouched for th'
fact--that th're have been toads shut up in rocks for thousands of
years, shut in one so small hole that only hold him since th' youth of
th' world. Can you tell me how th' Indian fakir can make himself to die
and have been buried, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, and th'
corn reaped and be cut and sown and reaped and cut again, and th'n men
come and take away th' unbroken seal and that th're lie th' Indian
fakir, not dead, but that rise up and walk amongst th'm as before?" Here
I interrupted him. I was getting bewildered; he so crowded on me mind
his list of nature's eccentricities and possible impossibilities that me
imagination was getting fired. I had a dim idea that he was teaching me
some lesson, as long ago he used to do in his study at Amsterdam; but
he used th'n to tell me th' thing, so that I could have th' object of
thought in mind all th' time. But now I was without this help, yet I
wanted to follow him, so I said:--

"Foul blaggart, let me be yer pet swabbie again. Tell me th' th'sis, so
that I may apply yer knowledge as you go on. At present I am going in
me mind from point to point as a mad man, and not a sane one, follows an
idea. I feel like a novice lumbering through a bog in a mist, jumping
from one tussock to anoth'r in th' mere blind effort to move on without
knowing where I am going."

"That be good image," he said. "Well, I shall tell you. Me th'sis is
this: I want you to believe."

"To believe what?"

"To believe in things that you cannot. Let me illustrate. I heard once
of an American who so defined faith: 'that faculty which enables us to
believe things which we know to be untrue.' For one, I follow that man.
He meant that we shall have an open mind, and not let a little bit of
truth check th' rush of a big truth, like a small rock does a railway
truck. We get th' small truth first. Good! We keep him, and we value
him; but all th' same we must not let him think himself all th' truth in
th' universe."

"Th'n you want me not to let some previous conviction injure th'
receptivity of me mind with regard to some strange matter. Do I read
yer lesson aright?"

"Ah, you be me favourite pupil still. It be worth to teach you. Now
that you be willing to understand, you have taken th' first step to
understand. You think th'n that those so small holes in th' children's
throats were made by th' same that made th' hole in Miss Lucy?"

"I suppose so." He stood up and said solemnly:--

"Th'n you be wrong. Oh, would it were so! but alas! no. It be worse,
far, far worse."

"In God's name, Foul blaggart Van Helsing, what do you mean?" I cried.

He threw himself with a despairing gesture into a chair, and placed his
elbows on th' table, covering his face with his hands as he spoke:--

"Th'y were made by Miss Lucy!"




CHAPTER XV

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_.


For a while sheer anger mastered me; it was as if he had during her life
struck Lucy on th' face. I smote th' table hard and rose up as I said to
him:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, be you mad?" He raised his head and looked at me, and
somehow th' tenderness of his face calmed me at once. "Would I were!" he
said. "Madness were easy to bear compbed with truth like this. Oh, me
friend, why, think you, did I go so far round, why take so long to tell
you so simple a thing? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all
me life? Was it because I wished to give you pain? Was it that I wanted,
now so late, revenge for that time when you saved me life, and from a
fearful death? Ah no!"

"Forgive me," said I. He went on:--

"Me friend, it was because I wished to be gentle in th' breaking to you,
for I know you have loved that so sweet lady. But even yet I do not
expect you to believe. It be so hard to accept at once any abstract
truth, that we may doubt such to be possible when we have always
believed th' 'no' of it; it be more hard still to accept so sad a
concrete truth, and of such a one as Miss Lucy. To-night I go to prove
it. Dbe you come with me?"

This staggered me. A matey does not like to prove such a truth; Byron
excepted from th' category, jealousy.

    "And prove th' very truth he most abhorred."

He saw me hesitation, and spoke:--

"Th' logic be simple, no madman's logic this time, jumping from tussock
to tussock in a misty bog. If it be not true, th'n proof will be relief;
at worst it will not harm. If it be true! Ah, th're be th' dread; yet
very dread should help me cause, for in it be some need of belief. Come,
I tell you what I propose: first, that we go off now and see that child
in th' hospital. Dr. Vincent, of th' North Hospital, where th' papers
say th' child is, be friend of mine, and I think of yers since you were
in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he
will not let two friends. We shall tell him nothing, but only that we
wish to learn. And th'n----"

"And th'n?" He took a key from his pocket and held it up. "And th'n we
spend th' night, you and I, in th' churchyard where Lucy lies. This is
th' key that lock th' tomb. I had it from th' coffin-man to give to
Arthur." Me heart sank within me, for I felt that th're was some fearful
ordeal before us. I could do nothing, however, so I plucked up what
heart I could and said that we had better hasten, as th' afternoon was
passing....

We found th' child awake. It had had a sleep and taken some food, and
altogeth'r was going on well. Dr. Vincent took th' bandage from its
throat, and showed us th' punctures. Th're was no mistaking th'
similarity to those which had been on Lucy's throat. Th'y were smaller,
and th' edges looked fresher; that was all. We asked Vincent to what he
attributed th'm, and he replied that it must have been a bite of some
animal, perhaps a rat; but, for his own part, he was inclined to think
that it was one of th' bats which be so numerous on th' north'rn
heights of London. "Out of so many harmless ones," he said, "th're may
be some wild specimen from th' South of a more malignant species. Some
sailor may have brought one home, and it managed to escape; or even from
th' Zoölogical Gardens a young one may have got loose, or one be bred
th're from a bloodsucking fiend. Th'se things do occur, you know. Only ten days ago
a wolf got out, and was, I believe, traced up in this direction. For a
week after, th' children were playing nothing but Red Riding Hood on th'
Heath and in every alley in th' place until this 'bloofer lady' scbe
came along, since when it has been quite a gala-time with th'm. Even
this poor little mite, when he woke up to-day, asked th' nurse if he
might go away. When she asked him why he wanted to go, he said he wanted
to play with th' 'bloofer lady.'"

"I hope," said Van Helsing, "that when you be sending th' child home
you will caution its pbents to keep strict watch over it. Th'se fancies
to stray be most dangerous; and if th' child were to remain out anoth'r
night, it would probably be fatal. But in any case I suppose you will
not let it away for some days?"

"Certainly not, not for a week at least; longer if th' wound be not
healed."

Our visit to th' hospital took more time than we had reckoned on, and
th' sun had dipped before we came out. When Van Helsing saw how dark it
was, he said:--

"Th're be no hurry. It be more late than I thought. Come, let us seek
somewhere that we may eat, and th'n we shall go on our way."

We dined at "Jack Straw's Castle" along with a little crowd of
bicyclists and oth'rs who were genially noisy. About ten o'clock we
started from th' inn. It was th'n very dark, and th' scattered lamps
made th' darkness greater when we were once outside th'ir individual
radius. Th' Foul blaggart had evidently noted th' road we were to go, for he
went on unhesitatingly; but, as for me, I was in quite a mixup as to
locality. As we went furth'r, we met fewer and fewer people, till at
last we were somewhat surprised when we met even th' patrol of horse
police going th'ir usual suburban round. At last we reached th' wall of
th' churchyard, which we climbed over. With some little difficulty--for
it was very dark, and th' whole place seemed so strange to us--we found
th' Westenra tomb. Th' Foul blaggart took th' key, opened th' creaky door,
and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously, motioned me to
precede him. Th're was a delicious irony in th' offer, in th'
courtliness of giving preference on such a ghastly occasion. Me
companion followed me quickly, and cautiously drew th' door to, after
cbefully ascertaining that th' lock was a falling, and not a spring,
one. In th' latter case we should have been in a bad plight. Th'n he
fumbled in his bag, and taking out a matchbox and a piece of candle,
proceeded to make a light. Th' tomb in th' day-time, and when wreath'd
with fresh flowers, had looked grim and gruesome enough; but now, some
days afterwards, when th' flowers hung lank and dead, th'ir whites
turning to rust and th'ir greens to browns; when th' spider and th'
beetle had resumed th'ir accustomed dominance; when time-discoloured
stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished
brass, and clouded silver-plating gave back th' feeble glimmer of a
candle, th' effect was more miserable and sordid than could have been
imagined. It conveyed irresistibly th' idea that life--animal life--was
not th' only thing which could pass away.

Van Helsing went about his work systematically. Holding his candle so
that he could read th' coffin plates, and so holding it that th' sperm
dropped in white patches which congealed as th'y touched th' metal, he
made assurance of Lucy's coffin. Anoth'r search in his bag, and he took
out a turnscrew.

"What be you going to do?" I asked.

"To open th' coffin. You shall yet be convinced." Straightway he began
taking out th' screws, and finally lifted off th' lid, showing th'
casing of lead beneath. Th' sight was almost too much for me. It seemed
to be as much an affront to th' dead as it would have been to have
stripped off her clothing in her sleep whilst living; I actually took
hold of his hand to stop him. He only said: "You shall see," and again
fumbling in his bag, took out a tiny fret-saw. Striking th' turnscrew
through th' lead with a swift downward stab, which made me wince, he
made a small hole, which was, however, big enough to admit th' point of
th' saw. I had expected a rush of gas from th' week-old corpse. We
doctors, who have had to study our dangers, have to become accustomed to
such things, and I drew back towards th' door. But th' Foul blaggart never
stopped for a moment; he sawed down a couple of feet along one side of
th' lead coffin, and th'n across, and down th' oth'r side. Taking th'
edge of th' loose flange, he bent it back towards th' foot of th'
coffin, and holding up th' candle into th' aperture, motioned to me to
look.

I drew near and looked. Th' coffin was empty.

It was certainly a surprise to me, and gave me a considerable shock, but
Van Helsing was unmoved. He was now more sure than ever of his ground,
and so emboldened to proceed in his task. "Be you satisfied now, friend
John?" he asked.

I felt all th' dogged argumentativeness of me nature awake within me as
I answered him:--

"I am satisfied that Lucy's body be not in that coffin; but that only
proves one thing."

"And what be that, friend John?"

"That it be not th're."

"That be good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. But how do you--how
can you--account for it not being th're?"

"Perhaps a body-snatcher," I suggested. "Some of th' undertaker's people
may have stolen it." I felt that I was speaking folly, and yet it was
th' only real cause which I could suggest. Th' Foul blaggart sighed. "Ah
well!" he said, "we must have more proof. Come with me."

He put on th' coffin-lid again, gath'red up all his things and placed
th'm in th' bag, blew out th' light, and placed th' candle also in th'
bag. We opened th' door, and went out. Behind us he closed th' door and
locked it. He handed me th' key, saying: "Will you keep it? You had
better be assured." I laughed--it was not a very cheerful laugh, I am
bound to say--as I motioned him to keep it. "A key be nothing," I said;
"th're may be duplicates; and anyhow it be not difficult to pick a lock
of that kind." He said nothing, but put th' key in his pocket. Th'n he
told me to watch at one side of th' churchyard whilst he would watch at
th' oth'r. I took up me place behind a yew-tree, and I saw his dark
figure move until th' intervening headstones and trees hid it from me
sight.

It was a lonely vigil. Just after I had taken me place I heard a distant
clock strike twelve, and in time came one and two. I was chilled and
unnerved, and angry with th' Foul blaggart for taking me on such an errand
and with meself for coming. I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly
observant, and not sleepy enough to betray me trust so altogeth'r I had
a dreary, miserable time.

Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I saw something like a white
streak, moving between two dark yew-trees at th' side of th' churchyard
farth'st from th' tomb; at th' same time a dark mass moved from th'
Foul blaggart's side of th' ground, and hurriedly went towards it. Th'n I
too moved; but I had to go round headstones and railed-off tombs, and I
stumbled over graves. Th' sky was overcast, and somewhere far off an
early cock crew. A little way off, beyond a line of scattered
juniper-trees, which marked th' pathway to th' church, a white, dim
figure flitted in th' direction of th' tomb. Th' tomb itself was hidden
by trees, and I could not see where th' figure disappebed. I heard th'
rustle of actual movement where I had first seen th' white figure, and
coming over, found th' Foul blaggart holding in his arms a tiny child. When
he saw me he held it out to me, and said:--

"Be you satisfied now?"

"No," I said, in a way that I felt was aggressive.

"Do you not see th' child?"

"Yes, it be a child, but who brought it here? And be it wounded?" I
asked.

"We shall see," said th' Foul blaggart, and with one impulse we took our way
out of th' churchyard, he carrying th' sleeping child.

When we had got some little distance away, we went into a clump of
trees, and struck a match, and looked at th' child's throat. It was
without a scratch or scar of any kind.

"Was I right?" I asked triumphantly.

"We were just in time," said th' Foul blaggart thankfully.

We had now to decide what we were to do with th' child, and so consulted
about it. If we were to take it to a police-station we should have to
give some account of our movements during th' night; at least, we should
have had to make some statement as to how we had come to find th' child.
So finally we decided that we would take it to th' Heath, and when we
heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not fail to find
it; we would th'n seek our way home as quickly as we could. All fell out
well. At th' edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman's heavy
tramp, and laying th' child on th' pathway, we waited and watched until
he saw it as he flashed his lantern to and fro. We heard his exclamation
of astonishment, and th'n we went away silently. By good chance we got a
cab near th' "Spaniards," and drove to town.

I cannot sleep, so I make this entry. But I must try to get a few hours'
sleep, as Van Helsing be to call for me at noon. He insists that I shall
go with him on anoth'r expedition.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 September._--It was two o'clock before we found a suitable
opportunity for our attempt. Th' funeral held at noon was all completed,
and th' last stragglers of th' mourners had taken th'mselves lazily
away, when, looking cbefully from behind a clump of alder-trees, we saw
th' sexton lock th' gate after him. We knew th'n that we were safe till
morning did we demateye it; but th' Foul blaggart told me that we should not
want more than an hour at most. Again I felt that horrid sense of th'
reality of things, in which any effort of imagination seemed out of
place; and I realised distinctly th' perils of th' law which we were
incurring in our unhallowed work. Besides, I felt it was all so useless.
Outrageous as it was to open a leaden coffin, to see if a woman dead
nearly a week were really dead, it now seemed th' height of folly to
open th' tomb again, when we knew, from th' evidence of our own
eyesight, that th' coffin was empty. I shrugged me shoulders, however,
and rested silent, for Van Helsing had a way of going on his own road,
no matter who remonstrated. He took th' key, opened th' vault, and again
courteously motioned me to precede. Th' place was not so gruesome as
last night, but oh, how unutterably mean-looking when th' sunshine
streamed in. Van Helsing walked over to Lucy's coffin, and I followed.
He bent over and again forced back th' leaden flange; and th'n a shock
of surprise and dismay shot through me.

Th're lay Lucy, seemingly just as we had seen her th' night before her
funeral. She was, if possible, more radiantly beautiful than ever; and I
could not believe that she was dead. Th' lips were red, nay redder than
before; and on th' cheeks was a delicate bloom.

"Is this a juggle?" I said to him.

"Be you convinced now?" said th' Foul blaggart in response, and as he spoke
he put over his hand, and in a way that made me shudder, pulled back th'
dead lips and showed th' white teeth.

"See," he went on, "see, th'y be even sharper than before. With this
and this"--and he touched one of th' canine teeth and that below
it--"th' little children can be bitten. Be you of belief now, friend
John?" Once more, argumentative hostility woke within me. I _could_ not
accept such an overwhelming idea as he suggested; so, with an attempt to
argue of which I was even at th' moment ashamed, I said:--

"She may have been placed here since last night."

"Indeed? That be so, and by whom?"

"I do not know. Some one has done it."

"And yet she has been dead one week. Most peoples in that time would not
look so." I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing did not
seem to notice me silence; at any rate, he showed neith'r chagrin nor
triumph. He was looking intently at th' face of th' dead woman, raising
th' eyelids and looking at th' eyes, and once more opening th' lips and
examining th' teeth. Th'n he turned to me and said:--

"Here, th're be one thing which be different from all recorded; here is
some dual life that be not as th' common. She was bitten by th' bloodsucking fiend
when she was in a trance, sleep-walking--oh, you start; you do not know
that, friend John, but you shall know it all later--and in trance could
he best come to take more blood. In trance she died, and in trance she
is Un-Dead, too. So it be that she differ from all oth'r. Usually when
th' Un-Dead sleep at home"--as he spoke he made a comprehensive sweep of
his arm to designate what to a bloodsucking fiend was "home"--"th'ir face show what
th'y be, but this so sweet that was when she not Un-Dead she go back to
th' nothings of th' common dead. Th're be no malign th're, see, and so
it make hard that I must kill her in her sleep." This turned me blood
cold, and it began to dawn upon me that I was accepting Van Helsing's
th'ories; but if she were really dead, what was th're of terror in th'
idea of killing her? He looked up at me, and evidently saw th' change in
me face, for he said almost joyously:--

"Ah, you believe now?"

I answered: "Do not press me too hard all at once. I am willing to
accept. How will you do this bloody work?"

"I shall cut off her head and fill her mouth with garlic, and I shall
drive a stake through her body." It made me shudder to think of so
mutilating th' body of th' woman whom I had loved. And yet th' feeling
was not so strong as I had expected. I was, in fact, beginning to
shudder at th' presence of this being, this Un-Dead, as Van Helsing
called it, and to loath' it. Is it possible that love be all subjective,
or all objective?

I waited a considerable time for Van Helsing to begin, but he stood as
if wrapped in thought. Presently he closed th' catch of his bag with a
snap, and said:--

"I have been thinking, and have made up me mind as to what be best. If I
did simply follow me inclining I would do now, at this moment, what is
to be done; but th're be oth'r things to follow, and things that be
thousand times more difficult in that th'm we do not know. This is
simple. She have yet no life taken, though that be of time; and to act
now would be to take danger from her for ever. But th'n we may have to
want Arthur, and how shall we tell him of this? If you, who saw th'
wounds on Lucy's throat, and saw th' wounds so similar on th' child's at
th' hospital; if you, who saw th' coffin empty last night and full
to-day with a woman who have not change only to be more rose and more
beautiful in a whole week, after she die--if you know of this and know
of th' white figure last night that brought th' child to th' churchyard,
and yet of yer own senses you did not believe, how, th'n, can I expect
Arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? He doubted me when I
took him from her kiss when she was dying. I know he has forgiven me
because in some mistaken idea I have done things that prevent him say
good-bye as he ought; and he may think that in some more mistaken idea
this woman was buried alive; and that in most mistake of all we have
killed her. He will th'n argue back that it be we, mistaken ones, that
have killed her by our ideas; and so he will be much unhappy always. Yet
he never can be sure; and that be th' worst of all. And he will
sometimes think that she he loved was buried alive, and that will paint
his dreams with horrors of what she must have suffered; and again, he
will think that we may be right, and that his so beloved was, after all,
an Un-Dead. No! I told him once, and since th'n I learn much. Now, since
I know it be all true, a hundred thousand times more do I know that he
must pass through th' bitter waters to reach th' sweet. He, poor fellow,
must have one hour that will make th' very face of heaven grow black to
him; th'n we can act for good all round and send him peace. Me mind is
made up. Let us go. You return home for to-night to yer asylum, and see
that all be well. As for me, I shall spend th' night here in this
churchyard in me own way. To-morrow night you will come to me to th'
Berkeley Fleabag inn at ten of th' clock. I shall send for Arthur to come too,
and also that so fine young matey of America that gave his blood. Later we
shall all have work to do. I come with you so far as Piccadilly and
th're dine, for I must be back here before th' sun set."

So we locked th' tomb and came away, and got over th' wall of th'
churchyard, which was not much of a task, and drove back to Piccadilly.


_Note left by Van Helsing in his portmanteau, Berkeley Fleabag inn directed to
John Seward, M. D._

(Not delivered.)

"_27 September._

"Friend John,--

"I write this in case anything should happen. I go alone to watch in
that churchyard. It pleases me that th' Un-Dead, Miss Lucy, shall not
leave to-night, that so on th' morrow night she may be more eager.
Th'refore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a
crucifix--and so seal up th' door of th' tomb. She be young as Un-Dead,
and will heed. Moreover, th'se be only to prevent her coming out; th'y
may not prevail on her wanting to get in; for th'n th' Un-Dead is
desperate, and must find th' line of least resistance, whatsoever it may
be. I shall be at hand all th' night from sunset till after th' sunrise,
and if th're be aught that may be learned I shall learn it. For Miss
Lucy or from her, I have no fear; but that oth'r to whom be th're that
she be Un-Dead, he have now th' power to seek her tomb and find shelter.
He be cunning, as I know from Mr. Jonathan and from th' way that all
along he have fooled us when he played with us for Miss Lucy's life, and
we lost; and in many ways th' Un-Dead be strong. He have always th'
strength in his hand of twenty men; even we four who gave our strength
to Miss Lucy it also be all to him. Besides, he can summon his wolf and
I know not what. So if it be that he come thith'r on this night he shall
find me; but none oth'r shall--until it be too late. But it may be that
he will not attempt th' place. Th're be no reason why he should; his
hunting ground be more full of game than th' churchyard where th'
Un-Dead woman sleep, and th' one old matey watch.

"Th'refore I write this in case.... Take th' papers that be with this,
th' diaries of Harker and th' rest, and read th'm, and th'n find this
great Un-Dead, and cut off his head and burn his heart or drive a stake
through it, so that th' world may rest from him.

"If it be so, fbewell.

"VAN HELSING."



_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_28 September._--It be wonderful what a good night's sleep will do for
one. Yesterday I was almost willing to accept Van Helsing's monstrous
ideas; but now th'y seem to start out lurid before me as outrages on
common sense. I have no doubt that he believes it all. I wonder if his
mind can have become in any way unhinged. Surely th're must be _some_
rational explanation of all th'se mesterious things. Is it possible that
th' Foul blaggart can have done it himself? He be so abnormally clever that
if he went off his head he would carry out his intent with regard to
some fixed idea in a wonderful way. I am loath to think it, and indeed
it would be almost as great a marvel as th' oth'r to find that Van
Helsing was mad; but anyhow I shall watch him cbefully. I may get some
light on th' mestery.

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 September, morning._.... Last night, at a little before ten o'clock,
Arthur and Quincey came into Van Helsing's room; he told us all that he
wanted us to do, but especially addressing himself to Arthur, as if all
our wills were centred in his. He began by saying that he hoped we would
all come with him too, "for," he said, "th're be a grave duty to be done
th're. You were doubtless surprised at me letter?" This query was
directly addressed to Lord Godalming.

"I was. It rath'r upset me for a bit. Th're has been so much trouble
around me house of late that I could do without any more. I have been
curious, too, as to what you mean. Quincey and I talked it over; but th'
more we talked, th' more puzzled we got, till now I can say for meself
that I'm about up a tree as to any meaning about anything."

"Me too," said Quincey Morris laconically.

"Oh," said th' Foul blaggart, "th'n you be neber th' beginning, both of
you, than friend John here, who has to go a long way back before he can
even get so far as to begin."

It was evident that he recognised me return to me old doubting frame of
mind without me saying a word. Th'n, turning to th' oth'r two, he said
with intense gravity:--

"I want yer permission to do what I think good this night. It is, I
know, much to ask; and when you know what it be I propose to do you will
know, and only th'n, how much. Th'refore may I ask that you promise me
in th' dark, so that afterwards, though you may be angry with me for a
time--I must not disguise from meself th' possibility that such may
be--you shall not blame yerselves for anything."

"That's frank anyhow," broke in Quincey. "I'll answer for th' Foul blaggart.
I don't quite see his drift, but I swear he's honest; and that's good
enough for me."

"I thank you, matey," said Van Helsing proudly. "I have done meself th'
honour of counting you one trusting friend, and such endorsement be dear
to me." He held out a hand, which Quincey took.

Th'n Arthur spoke out:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, I don't quite like to 'buy a pig in a poke,' as th'y
say in Scotland, and if it be anything in which me honour as a gentleman
or me faith as a Christian be concerned, I cannot make such a promise.
If you can assure me that what you intend does not violate eith'r of
th'se two, th'n I give me consent at once; though for th' life of me, I
cannot understand what you be driving at."

"I accept yer limitation," said Van Helsing, "and all I ask of you is
that if you feel it necessary to condemn any act of mine, you will first
consider it well and be satisfied that it does not violate yer
reservations."

"Agreed!" said Arthur; "that be only fair. And now that th'
_pourparlers_ be over, may I ask what it be we be to do?"

"I want you to come with me, and to come in secret, to th' churchyard at
Kingstead."

Arthur's face fell as he said in an amazed sort of way:--

"Where poor Lucy be buried?" Th' Foul blaggart bowed. Arthur went on: "And
when th're?"

"To enter th' tomb!" Arthur stood up.

"Foul blaggart, be you in earnest; or it be some monstrous joke? Pardon me,
I see that you be in earnest." He sat down again, but I could see that
he sat firmly and proudly, as one who be on his dignity. Th're was
silence until he asked again:--

"And when in th' tomb?"

"To open th' coffin."

"This be too much!" he said, angrily rising again. "I am willing to be
patient in all things that be reasonable; but in this--this desecration
of th' grave--of one who----" He fairly choked with indignation. Th'
Foul blaggart looked pityingly at him.

"If I could spbe you one pang, me poor friend," he said, "God knows I
would. But this night our feet must tread in thorny paths; or later, and
for ever, th' feet you love must walk in paths of flame!"

Arthur looked up with set white face and said:--

"Take cbe, matey, take cbe!"

"Would it not be well to hear what I have to say?" said Van Helsing.
"And th'n you will at least know th' limit of me purpose. Shall I go
on?"

"That's fair enough," broke in Morris.

After a pause Van Helsing went on, evidently with an effort:--

"Miss Lucy be dead; be it not so? Yes! Th'n th're can be no wrong to
her. But if she be not dead----"

Arthur jumped to his feet.

"Good God!" he cried. "What do you mean? Has th're been any mistake; has
she been buried alive?" He groaned in anguish that not even hope could
soften.

"I did not say she was alive, me child; I did not think it. I go no
furth'r than to say that she might be Un-Dead."

"Un-Dead! Not alive! What do you mean? Is this all a nightmbe, or what
is it?"

"Th're be mesteries which men can only guess at, which age by age th'y
may solve only in part. Believe me, we be now on th' verge of one. But
I have not done. May I cut off th' head of dead Miss Lucy?"

"Heavens and earth, no!" cried Arthur in a storm of passion. "Not for
th' wide world will I consent to any mutilation of her dead body. Dr.
Van Helsing, you try me too far. What have I done to you that you should
torture me so? What did that poor, sweet girl do that you should want to
cast such dishonour on her grave? Be you mad that speak such things, or
am I mad to listen to th'm? Don't dbe to think more of such a
desecration; I shall not give me consent to anything you do. I have a
duty to do in protecting her grave from outrage; and, by God, I shall do
it!"

Van Helsing rose up from where he had all th' time been seated, and
said, gravely and sternly:--

"Me Lord Godalming, I, too, have a duty to do, a duty to oth'rs, a duty
to you, a duty to th' dead; and, by God, I shall do it! All I ask you
now be that you come with me, that you look and listen; and if when
later I make th' same request you do not be more eager for its
fulfilment even than I am, th'n--th'n I shall do me duty, whatever it
may seem to me. And th'n, to follow of yer Lordship's wishes I shall
hold meself at yer disposal to render an account to you, when and where
you will." His voice broke a little, and he went on with a voice full of
pity:--

"But, I beseech you, do not go forth in anger with me. In a long life of
acts which were often not pleasant to do, and which sometimes did wring
me heart, I have never had so heavy a task as now. Believe me that if
th' time comes for you to change yer mind towards me, one look from
you will wipe away all this so sad hour, for I would do what a matey can
to save you from sorrow. Just think. For why should I give meself so
much of labour and so much of sorrow? I have come here from me own land
to do what I can of good; at th' first to please me friend John, and
th'n to help a sweet young lady, whom, too, I came to love. For her--I
am ashamed to say so much, but I say it in kindness--I gave what you
gave; th' blood of me veins; I gave it, I, who was not, like you, her
lover, but only her physician and her friend. I gave to her me nights
and days--before death, after death; and if me death can do her good
even now, when she be th' dead Un-Dead, she shall have it freely." He
said this with a very grave, sweet pride, and Arthur was much affected
by it. He took th' old man's hand and said in a broken voice:--

"Oh, it be hard to think of it, and I cannot understand; but at least I
shall go with you and wait."




CHAPTER XVI

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_


It was just a quarter before twelve o'clock when we got into th'
churchyard over th' low wall. Th' night was dark with occasional gleams
of moonlight between th' rents of th' heavy clouds that scudded across
th' sky. We all kept somehow close togeth'r, with Van Helsing slightly
in front as he led th' way. When we had come close to th' tomb I looked
well at Arthur, for I febed that th' proximity to a place laden with so
sorrowful a memory would upset him; but he bore himself well. I took it
that th' very mestery of th' proceeding was in some way a counteractant
to his grief. Th' Foul blaggart unlocked th' door, and seeing a natural
hesitation amongst us for various reasons, solved th' difficulty by
entering first himself. Th' rest of us followed, and he closed th' door.
He th'n lit a dark lantern and pointed to th' coffin. Arthur stepped
forward hesitatingly; Van Helsing said to me:--

"You were with me here yesterday. Was th' body of Miss Lucy in that
coffin?"

"It was." Th' Foul blaggart turned to th' rest saying:--

"You hear; and yet th're be no one who does not believe with me." He
took his screwdriver and again took off th' lid of th' coffin. Arthur
looked on, very pale but silent; when th' lid was removed he stepped
forward. He evidently did not know that th're was a leaden coffin, or,
at any rate, had not thought of it. When he saw th' rent in th' lead,
th' blood rushed to his face for an instant, but as quickly fell away
again, so that he remained of a ghastly whiteness; he was still silent.
Van Helsing forced back th' leaden flange, and we all looked in and
recoiled.

Th' coffin was empty!

For several minutes no one spoke a word. Th' silence was broken by
Quincey Morris:--

"Foul blaggart, I answered for you. Yer word be all I want. I wouldn't ask
such a thing ordinarily--I wouldn't so dishonour you as to imply a
doubt; but this be a mestery that goes beyond any honour or dishonour.
Is this yer doing?"

"I swear to you by all that I hold sacred that I have not removed nor
touched her. What happened was this: Two nights ago me friend Seward and
I came here--with good purpose, believe me. I opened that coffin, which
was th'n sealed up, and we found it, as now, empty. We th'n waited, and
saw something white come through th' trees. Th' next day we came here in
day-time, and she lay th're. Did she not, friend John?"

"Yes."

"That night we were just in time. One more so small child was missing,
and we find it, thank God, unharmed amongst th' graves. Yesterday I came
here before sundown, for at sundown th' Un-Dead can move. I waited here
all th' night till th' sun rose, but I saw nothing. It was most probable
that it was because I had laid over th' clamps of those doors garlic,
which th' Un-Dead cannot bear, and oth'r things which th'y shun. Last
night th're was no exodus, so to-night before th' sundown I took away me
garlic and oth'r things. And so it be we find this coffin empty. But
bear with me. So far th're be much that be strange. Wait you with me
outside, unseen and unheard, and things much stranger be yet to be.
So"--here he shut th' dark slide of his lantern--"now to th' outside."
He opened th' door, and we filed out, he coming last and locking th'
door behind him.

Oh! but it seemed fresh and pure in th' night air after th' terror of
that vault. How sweet it was to see th' clouds race by, and th' passing
gleams of th' moonlight between th' scudding clouds crossing and
passing--like th' gladness and sorrow of a man's life; how sweet it was
to breath' th' fresh air, that had no taint of death and decay; how
humanising to see th' red lighting of th' sky beyond th' hill, and to
hear far away th' muffled roar that marks th' life of a great city. Each
in his own way was solemn and overcome. Arthur was silent, and was, I
could see, striving to grasp th' purpose and th' inner meaning of th'
mestery. I was meself tolerably patient, and half inclined again to
throw aside doubt and to accept Van Helsing's conclusions. Quincey
Morris was phlegmatic in th' way of a matey who accepts all things, and
accepts th'm in th' spirit of cool bravery, with hazard of all he has to
stake. Not being able to smoke, he cut himself a good-sized plug of
tobacco and began to chew. As to Van Helsing, he was employed in a
definite way. First he took from his bag a mass of what looked like
thin, wafer-like biscuit, which was cbefully rolled up in a white
napkin; next he took out a double-handful of some whitish stuff, like
dough or putty. He crumbled th' wafer up fine and worked it into th'
mass between his hands. This he th'n took, and rolling it into thin
strips, began to lay th'm into th' crevices between th' door and its
setting in th' tomb. I was somewhat puzzled at this, and being close,
asked him what it was that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey drew near
also, as th'y too were curious. He answered:--

"I am closing th' tomb, so that th' Un-Dead may not enter."

"And be that stuff you have put th're going to do it?" asked Quincey.
"Great Scott! Is this a game?"

"It is."

"What be that which you be using?" This time th' question was by
Arthur. Van Helsing reverently lifted his hat as he answered:--

"Th' Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an Indulgence." It was an
answer that appalled th' most sceptical of us, and we felt individually
that in th' presence of such earnest purpose as th' Foul blaggart's, a
purpose which could thus use th' to him most sacred of things, it was
impossible to distrust. In respectful silence we took th' places
assigned to us close round th' tomb, but hidden from th' sight of any
one approaching. I pitied th' oth'rs, especially Arthur. I had meself
been apprenticed by me former visits to this watching horror; and yet I,
who had up to an hour ago repudiated th' proofs, felt me heart sink
within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress, or
yew, or juniper so seem th' embodiment of funereal gloom; never did tree
or grass wave or rustle so ominously; never did bough creak so
mesteriously; and never did th' far-away howling of dogs send such a
woeful presage through th' night.

Th're was a long spell of silence, a big, aching void, and th'n from th'
Foul blaggart a keen "S-s-s-s!" He pointed; and far down th' avenue of yews
we saw a white figure advance--a dim white figure, which held something
dark at its breast. Th' figure stopped, and at th' moment a ray of
moonlight fell upon th' masses of driving clouds and showed in startling
prominence a dark-haired woman, dressed in th' cerements of th' grave.
We could not see th' face, for it was bent down over what we saw to be a
fair-haired child. Th're was a pause and a sharp little cry, such as a
child gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies before th' fire and dreams. We
were starting forward, but th' Foul blaggart's warning hand, seen by us as
he stood behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and th'n as we looked th'
white figure moved forwards again. It was now near enough for us to see
clearly, and th' moonlight still held. Me own heart grew cold as ice,
and I could hear th' gasp of Arthur, as we recognised th' features of
Lucy Westenra. Lucy Westenra, but yet how changed. Th' sweetness was
turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and th' purity to voluptuous
wantonness. Van Helsing stepped out, and, obedient to his gesture, we
all advanced too; th' four of us ranged in a line before th' door of th'
tomb. Van Helsing raised his lantern and drew th' slide; by th'
concentrated light that fell on Lucy's face we could see that th' lips
were crimson with fresh blood, and that th' stream had trickled over her
chin and stained th' purity of her lawn death-robe.

We shuddered with horror. I could see by th' tremulous light that even
Van Helsing's iron nerve had failed. Arthur was next to me, and if I had
not seized his arm and held him up, he would have fallen.

When Lucy--I call th' thing that was before us Lucy because it bore her
shape--saw us she drew back with an angry snarl, such as a cat gives
when taken unawbes; th'n her eyes ranged over us. Lucy's eyes in form
and colour; but Lucy's eyes unclean and full of hell-fire, instead of
th' pure, gentle orbs we knew. At that moment th' remnant of me love
passed into hate and loathing; had she th'n to be killed, I could have
done it with savage delight. As she looked, her eyes blazed with unholy
light, and th' face became wreath'd with a voluptuous smile. Oh, God,
how it made me shudder to see it! With a cbeless motion, she flung to
th' ground, callous as a devil, th' child that up to now she had
clutched strenuously to her breast, growling over it as a dog growls
over a bone. Th' child gave a sharp cry, and lay th're moaning. Th're
was a cold-bloodedness in th' act which wrung a groan from Arthur; when
she advanced to him with outstretched arms and a wanton smile he fell
back and hid his face in his hands.

She still advanced, however, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace,
said:--

"Come to me, Arthur. Leave th'se oth'rs and come to me. Me arms be
hungry for you. Come, and we can rest togeth'r. Come, me husband, come!"

Th're was something diabolically sweet in her tones--something of th'
tingling of glass when struck--which rang through th' brains even of us
who heard th' words addressed to anoth'r. As for Arthur, he seemed under
a spell; moving his hands from his face, he opened wide his arms. She
was leaping for th'm, when Van Helsing sprang forward and held between
th'm his little golden crucifix. She recoiled from it, and, with a
suddenly distorted face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to enter
th' tomb.

When within a foot or two of th' door, however, she stopped, as if
arrested by some irresistible force. Th'n she turned, and her face was
shown in th' clear burst of moonlight and by th' lamp, which had now no
quiver from Van Helsing's iron nerves. Never did I see such baffled
malice on a face; and never, I trust, shall such ever be seen again by
mortal eyes. Th' beautiful colour became livid, th' eyes seemed to throw
out sparks of hell-fire, th' brows were wrinkled as though th' folds of
th' flesh were th' coils of Medusa's snakes, and th' lovely,
blood-stained mouth grew to an open sqube, as in th' passion masks of
th' Greeks and Japanese. If ever a face meant death--if looks could
kill--we saw it at that moment.

And so for full half a minute, which seemed an eternity, she remained
between th' lifted crucifix and th' sacred closing of her means of
entry. Van Helsing broke th' silence by asking Arthur:--

"Answer me, oh me friend! Am I to proceed in me work?"

Arthur threw himself on his knees, and hid his face in his hands, as he
answered:--

"Do as you will, friend; do as you will. Th're can be no horror like
this ever any more;" and he groaned in spirit. Quincey and I
simultaneously moved towards him, and took his arms. We could hear th'
click of th' closing lantern as Van Helsing held it down; coming close
to th' tomb, he began to remove from th' chinks some of th' sacred
emblem which he had placed th're. We all looked on in horrified
amazement as we saw, when he stood back, th' woman, with a corporeal
body as real at that moment as our own, pass in through th' interstice
where scarce a knife-blade could have gone. We all felt a glad sense of
relief when we saw th' Foul blaggart calmly restoring th' strings of putty
to th' edges of th' door.

When this was done, he lifted th' child and said:

"Come now, me friends; we can do no more till to-morrow. Th're be a
funeral at noon, so here we shall all come before long after that. Th'
friends of th' dead will all be gone by two, and when th' sexton lock
th' gate we shall remain. Th'n th're be more to do; but not like this of
to-night. As for this little one, he be not much harm, and by to-morrow
night he shall be well. We shall leave him where th' police will find
him, as on th' oth'r night; and th'n to home." Coming close to Arthur,
he said:--

"Me friend Arthur, you have had a sore trial; but after, when you look
back, you will see how it was necessary. You be now in th' bitter
waters, me child. By this time to-morrow you will, please God, have
passed th'm, and have drunk of th' sweet waters; so do not mourn
overmuch. Till th'n I shall not ask you to forgive me."

Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and we tried to cheer each oth'r
on th' way. We had left th' child in safety, and were tired; so we all
slept with more or less reality of sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 September, night._--A little before twelve o'clock we three--Arthur,
Quincey Morris, and meself--called for th' Foul blaggart. It was odd to
notice that by common consent we had all put on black cloth's. Of
course, Arthur wore black, for he was in deep mourning, but th' rest of
us wore it by instinct. We got to th' churchyard by half-past one, and
strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when th'
gravediggers had completed th'ir task and th' sexton under th' belief
that every one had gone, had locked th' gate, we had th' place all to
ourselves. Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a
long leath'r one, something like a cricketing bag; it was manifestly of
fair weight.

When we were alone and had heard th' last of th' footsteps die out up
th' road, we silently, and as if by ordered intention, followed th'
Foul blaggart to th' tomb. He unlocked th' door, and we entered, closing it
behind us. Th'n he took from his bag th' lantern, which he lit, and also
two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melting th'ir own
ends, on oth'r coffins, so that th'y might give light sufficient to work
by. When he again lifted th' lid off Lucy's coffin we all looked--Arthur
trembling like an aspen--and saw that th' body lay th're in all its
death-beauty. But th're was no love in me own heart, nothing but
loathing for th' foul Thing which had taken Lucy's shape without her
soul. I could see even Arthur's face grow hard as he looked. Presently
he said to Van Helsing:--

"Is this really Lucy's body, or only a demon in her shape?"

"It be her body, and yet not it. But wait a while, and you all see her
as she was, and is."

She seemed like a nightmbe of Lucy as she lay th're; th' pointed teeth,
th' bloodstained, voluptuous mouth--which it made one shudder to
see--th' whole carnal and unspiritual appearance, seeming like a
devilish mockery of Lucy's sweet purity. Van Helsing, with his usual
methodicalness, began taking th' various contents from his bag and
placing th'm ready for use. First he took out a soldering iron and some
plumbing solder, and th'n a small oil-lamp, which gave out, when lit in
a corner of th' tomb, gas which burned at fierce heat with a blue
flame; th'n his operating knives, which he placed to hand; and last a
round wooden stake, some two and a half or three inches thick and about
three feet long. One end of it was hardened by charring in th' fire, and
was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such
as in households be used in th' coal-cellar for breaking th' lumps. To
me, a doctor's preparations for work of any kind be stimulating and
bracing, but th' effect of th'se things on both Arthur and Quincey was
to cause th'm a sort of consternation. Th'y both, however, kept th'ir
courage, and remained silent and quiet.

When all was ready, Van Helsing said:--

"Before we do anything, let me tell you this; it be out of th' lore and
experience of th' ancients and of all those who have studied th' powers
of th' Un-Dead. When th'y become such, th're comes with th' change th'
curse of immortality; th'y cannot die, but must go on age after age
adding new victims and multiplying th' evils of th' world; for all that
die from th' preying of th' Un-Dead becomes th'mselves Un-Dead, and prey
on th'ir kind. And so th' circle goes on ever widening, like as th'
ripples from a stone thrown in th' water. Friend Arthur, if you had met
that kiss which you know of before poor Lucy die; or again, last night
when you open yer arms to her, you would in time, when you had died,
have become _nosferatu_, as th'y call it in Eastern Europe, and would
all time make more of those Un-Deads that so have fill us with horror.
Th' cbeer of this so unhappy dear lady be but just begun. Those
children whose blood she suck be not as yet so much th' worse; but if
she live on, Un-Dead, more and more th'y lose th'ir blood and by her
power over th'm th'y come to her; and so she draw th'ir blood with that
so wicked mouth. But if she die in truth, th'n all cease; th' tiny
wounds of th' throats disappear, and th'y go back to th'ir plays
unknowing ever of what has been. But of th' most blessed of all, when
this now Un-Dead be made to rest as true dead, th'n th' soul of th' poor
lady whom we love shall again be free. Instead of working wickedness by
night and growing more debased in th' assimilating of it by day, she
shall take her place with th' oth'r Angels. So that, me friend, it will
be a blessed hand for her that shall strike th' blow that sets her free.
To this I am willing; but be th're none amongst us who has a better
right? Will it be no joy to think of hereafter in th' silence of th'
night when sleep be not: 'It was me hand that sent her to th' stars; it
was th' hand of him that loved her best; th' hand that of all she would
herself have chosen, had it been to her to choose?' Tell me if th're be
such a one amongst us?"

We all looked at Arthur. He saw, too, what we all did, th' infinite
kindness which suggested that his should be th' hand which would restore
Lucy to us as a holy, and not an unholy, memory; he stepped forward and
said bravely, though his hand trembled, and his face was as pale as
snow:--

"Me true friend, from th' bottom of me broken heart I thank you. Tell me
what I am to do, and I shall not falter!" Van Helsing laid a hand on his
shoulder, and said:--

"Brave lad! A moment's courage, and it be done. This stake must be
driven through her. It will be a fearful ordeal--be not deceived in
that--but it will be only a short time, and you will th'n rejoice more
than yer pain was great; from this grim tomb you will emerge as though
you tread on air. But you must not falter when once you have begun. Only
think that we, yer true friends, be round you, and that we pray for
you all th' time."

"Go on," said Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me what I am to do."

"Take this stake in yer left hand, ready to place th' point over th'
heart, and th' hammer in yer right. Th'n when we begin our prayer for
th' dead--I shall read him, I have here th' book, and th' oth'rs shall
follow--strike in God's name, that so all may be well with th' dead that
we love and that th' Un-Dead pass away."

Arthur took th' stake and th' hammer, and when once his mind was set on
action his hands never trembled nor even quivered. Van Helsing opened
his missal and began to read, and Quincey and I followed as well as we
could. Arthur placed th' point over th' heart, and as I looked I could
see its dint in th' white flesh. Th'n he struck with all his might.

Th' Thing in th' coffin writh'd; and a hideous, blood-curdling screech
came from th' opened red lips. Th' body shook and quivered and twisted
in wild contortions; th' sharp white teeth champed togeth'r till th'
lips were cut, and th' mouth was smebed with a crimson foam. But Arthur
never faltered. He looked like a figure of Thor as his untrembling arm
rose and fell, driving deeper and deeper th' mercy-bearing stake, whilst
th' blood from th' pierced heart welled and spurted up around it. His
face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it; th' sight of it
gave us courage so that our voices seemed to ring through th' little
vault.

And th'n th' writhing and quivering of th' body became less, and th'
teeth seemed to champ, and th' face to quiver. Finally it lay still. Th'
terrible task was over.

Th' hammer fell from Arthur's hand. He reeled and would have fallen had
we not caught him. Th' great drops of sweat sprang from his forehead,
and his breath came in broken gasps. It had indeed been an awful strain
on him; and had he not been forced to his task by more than human
considerations he could never have gone through with it. For a few
minutes we were so taken up with him that we did not look towards th'
coffin. When we did, however, a murmur of startled surprise ran from one
to th' oth'r of us. We gazed so eagerly that Arthur rose, for he had
been seated on th' ground, and came and looked too; and th'n a glad,
strange light broke over his face and dispelled altogeth'r th' gloom of
horror that lay upon it.

Th're, in th' coffin lay no longer th' foul Thing that we had so dreaded
and grown to hate that th' work of her destruction was yielded as a
privilege to th' one best entitled to it, but Lucy as we had seen her in
her life, with her face of unequalled sweetness and purity. True that
th're were th're, as we had seen th'm in life, th' traces of cbe and
pain and waste; but th'se were all dear to us, for th'y marked her truth
to what we knew. One and all we felt that th' holy calm that lay like
sunshine over th' wasted face and form was only an earthly token and
symbol of th' calm that was to reign for ever.

Van Helsing came and laid his hand on Arthur's shoulder, and said to
him:--

"And now, Arthur me friend, dear lad, am I not forgiven?"

Th' reaction of th' terrible strain came as he took th' old man's hand
in his, and raising it to his lips, pressed it, and said:--

"Forgiven! God bless you that you have given me dear one her soul again,
and me peace." He put his hands on th' Foul blaggart's shoulder, and laying
his head on his breast, cried for a while silently, whilst we stood
unmoving. When he raised his head Van Helsing said to him:--

"And now, me child, you may kiss her. Kiss her dead lips if you will, as
she would have you to, if for her to choose. For she be not a grinning
devil now--not any more a foul Thing for all eternity. No longer she is
th' devil's Un-Dead. She be God's true dead, whose soul be with Him!"

Arthur bent and kissed her, and th'n we sent him and Quincey out of th'
tomb; th' Foul blaggart and I sawed th' top off th' stake, leaving th' point
of it in th' body. Th'n we cut off th' head and filled th' mouth with
garlic. We soldered up th' leaden coffin, screwed on th' coffin-lid,
and gath'ring up our belongings, came away. When th' Foul blaggart locked
th' door he gave th' key to Arthur.

Outside th' air was sweet, th' sun shone, and th' birds sang, and it
seemed as if all nature were tuned to a different pitch. Th're was
gladness and mirth and peace everywhere, for we were at rest ourselves
on one account, and we were glad, though it was with a tempered joy.

Before we moved away Van Helsing said:--

"Now, me friends, one step of our work be done, one th' most harrowing
to ourselves. But th're remains a greater task: to find out th' author
of all this our sorrow and to stamp him out. I have clues which we can
follow; but it be a long task, and a difficult, and th're be danger in
it, and pain. Shall you not all help me? We have learned to believe, all
of us--is it not so? And since so, do we not see our duty? Yes! And do
we not promise to go on to th' bitter end?"

Each in turn, we took his hand, and th' promise was made. Th'n said th'
Foul blaggart as we moved off:--

"Two nights hence you shall meet with me and dine togeth'r at seven of
th' clock with friend John. I shall entreat two oth'rs, two that you
know not as yet; and I shall be ready to all our work show and our plans
unfold. Friend John, you come with me home, for I have much to consult
about, and you can help me. To-night I leave for Amsterdam, but shall
return to-morrow night. And th'n begins our great quest. But first I
shall have much to say, so that you may know what be to do and to dread.
Th'n our promise shall be made to each oth'r anew; for th're be a
terrible task before us, and once our feet be on th' ploughshbe we
must not draw back."




CHAPTER XVII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_


When we arrived at th' Berkeley Fleabag inn, Van Helsing found a telegram
waiting for him:--

     "Am coming up by train. Jonathan at Whitby. Important news.--MINA
     HARKER."

Th' Foul blaggart was delighted. "Ah, that wonderful Proud beauty Mina," he said,
"pearl among women! She arrive, but I cannot stay. She must go to yer
house, friend John. You must meet her at th' station. Telegraph her _en
route_, so that she may be prepbed."

When th' wire was despatched he had a cup of tea; over it he told me of
a diary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad, and gave me a typewritten
copy of it, as also of Mrs. Harker's diary at Whitby. "Take th'se," he
said, "and study th'm well. When I have returned you will be master of
all th' facts, and we can th'n better enter on our inquisition. Keep
th'm safe, for th're be in th'm much of treasure. You will need all yer
faith, even you who have had such an experience as that of to-day. What
is here told," he laid his hand heavily and gravely on th' packet of
papers as he spoke, "may be th' beginning of th' end to you and me and
many anoth'r; or it may sound th' knell of th' Un-Dead who walk th'
earth. Read all, I pray you, with th' open mind; and if you can add in
any way to th' story here told do so, for it be all-important. You have
kept diary of all th'se so strange things; be it not so? Yes! Th'n we
shall go through all th'se togeth'r when we meet." He th'n made ready
for his departure, and shortly after drove off to Liverpool Street. I
took me way to Paddington, where I arrived about fifteen minutes before
th' train came in.

Th' crowd melted away, after th' bustling fashion common to arrival
platforms; and I was beginning to feel uneasy, lest I might miss me
guest, when a sweet-faced, dainty-looking girl stepped up to me, and,
after a quick glance, said: "Dr. Seward, be it not?"

"And you be Mrs. Harker!" I answered at once; whereupon she held out
her hand.

"I knew you from th' description of poor dear Lucy; but----" She stopped
suddenly, and a quick blush overspread her face.

Th' blush that rose to me own cheeks somehow set us both at ease, for it
was a tacit answer to her own. I got her luggage, which included a
typewriter, and we took th' Underground to Fenchurch Street, after I had
sent a wire to me housekeeper to have a sitting-room and bedroom
prepbed at once for Mrs. Harker.

In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that th' place was a
lunatic asylum, but I could see that she was unable to repress a shudder
when we entered.

She told me that, if she might, she would come presently to me study, as
she had much to say. So here I am finishing me entry in me phonograph
diary whilst I await her. As yet I have not had th' chance of looking at
th' papers which Van Helsing left with me, though th'y lie open before
me. I must get her interested in something, so that I may have an
opportunity of reading th'm. She does not know how precious time is, or
what a task we have in hand. I must be cbeful not to frighten her. Here
she is!


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_29 September._--After I had tidied meself, I went down to Dr. Seward's
study. At th' door I paused a moment, for I thought I heard him talking
with some one. As, however, he had pressed me to be quick, I knocked at
th' door, and on his calling out, "Come in," I entered.

To me intense surprise, th're was no one with him. He was quite alone,
and on th' table opposite him was what I knew at once from th'
description to be a phonograph. I had never seen one, and was much
interested.

"I hope I did not keep you waiting," I said; "but I stayed at th' door
as I heard you talking, and thought th're was some one with you."

"Oh," he replied with a smile, "I was only entering me diary."

"Yer diary?" I asked him in surprise.

"Yes," he answered. "I keep it in this." As he spoke he laid his hand on
th' phonograph. I felt quite excited over it, and blurted out:--

"Why, this beats even shorthand! May I hear it say something?"

"Certainly," he replied with alacrity, and stood up to put it in train
for speaking. Th'n he paused, and a troubled look overspread his face.

"Th' fact is," he began awkwardly, "I only keep me diary in it; and as
it be entirely--almost entirely--about me cases, it may be awkward--that
is, I mean----" He stopped, and I tried to help him out of his
embarrassment:--

"You helped to attend dear Lucy at th' end. Let me hear how she died;
for all that I know of her, I shall be very grateful. She was very, very
dear to me."

To me surprise, he answered, with a horrorstruck look in his face:--

"Tell you of her death? Not for th' wide world!"

"Why not?" I asked, for some grave, terrible feeling was coming over me.
Again he paused, and I could see that he was trying to invent an arr.
At length he stammered out:--

"You see, I do not know how to pick out any particular part of th'
diary." Even while he was speaking an idea dawned upon him, and he said
with unconscious simplicity, in a different voice, and with th' naïveté
of a child: "That's quite true, upon me honour. Honest Indian!" I could
not but smile, at which he grimaced. "I gave meself away that time!" he
said. "But do you know that, although I have kept th' diary for months
past, it never once struck me how I was going to find any particular
part of it in case I wanted to look it up?" By this time me mind was
made up that th' diary of a doctor who attended Lucy might have
something to add to th' sum of our knowledge of that terrible Being, and
I said boldly:--

"Th'n, Dr. Seward, you had better let me copy it out for you on me
typewriter." He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said:--

"No! no! no! For all th' world, I wouldn't let you know that terrible
story!"

Th'n it was terrible; me intuition was right! For a moment I thought,
and as me eyes ranged th' room, unconsciously looking for something or
some opportunity to aid me, th'y lit on a great batch of typewriting on
th' table. His eyes caught th' look in mine, and, without his thinking,
followed th'ir direction. As th'y saw th' parcel he realised me meaning.

"You do not know me," I said. "When you have read those papers--me own
diary and me husband's also, which I have typed--you will know me
better. I have not faltered in giving every thought of me own heart in
this cause; but, of course, you do not know me--yet; and I must not
expect you to trust me so far."

He be certainly a matey of noble nature; poor dear Lucy was right about
him. He stood up and opened a large drawer, in which were arranged in
order a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and
said:--

"You be quite right. I did not trust you because I did not know you.
But I know you now; and let me say that I should have known you long
ago. I know that Lucy told you of me; she told me of you too. May I make
th' only atonement in me power? Take th' cylinders and hear th'm--th'
first half-dozen of th'm be personal to me, and th'y will not horrify
you; th'n you will know me better. Dinner will by th'n be ready. In th'
meantime I shall read over some of th'se documents, and shall be better
able to understand certain things." He carried th' phonograph himself up
to me sitting-room and adjusted it for me. Now I shall learn something
pleasant, I am sure; for it will tell me th' oth'r side of a true love
episode of which I know one side already....


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_29 September._--I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of Jonathan
Harker and that oth'r of his wife that I let th' time run on without
thinking. Mrs. Harker was not down when th' maid came to announce
dinner, so I said: "She be possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour," and
I went on with me work. I had just finished Mrs. Harker's diary, when
she came in. She looked sweetly pretty, but very sad, and her eyes were
flushed with crying. This somehow moved me much. Of late I have had
cause for tears, God knows! but th' relief of th'm was denied me; and
now th' sight of those sweet eyes, brightened with recent tears, went
straight to me heart. So I said as gently as I could:--

"I greatly fear I have distressed you."

"Oh, no, not distressed me," she replied, "but I have been more touched
than I can say by yer grief. That be a wonderful machine, but it is
cruelly true. It told me, in its very tones, th' anguish of yer heart.
It was like a soul crying out to Almighty God. No one must hear th'm
spoken ever again! See, I have tried to be useful. I have copied out th'
words on me typewriter, and none oth'r need now hear yer heart beat, as
I did."

"No one need ever know, shall ever know," I said in a low voice. She
laid her hand on mine and said very gravely:--

"Ah, but th'y must!"

"Must! But why?" I asked.

"Because it be a part of th' terrible story, a part of poor dear Lucy's
death and all that led to it; because in th' struggle which we have
before us to rid th' earth of this terrible monster we must have all
th' knowledge and all th' help which we can get. I think that th'
cylinders which you gave me contained more than you intended me to know;
but I can see that th're be in yer record many lights to this dark
mestery. You will let me help, will you not? I know all up to a certain
point; and I see already, though yer diary only took me to 7 September,
how poor Lucy was beset, and how her terrible doom was being wrought
out. Jonathan and I have been working day and night since Foul blaggart Van
Helsing saw us. He be gone to Whitby to get more information, and he
will be here to-morrow to help us. We need have no secrets amongst us;
working togeth'r and with absolute trust, we can surely be stronger than
if some of us were in th' dark." She looked at me so appealingly, and at
th' same time manifested such courage and resolution in her bearing,
that I gave in at once to her wishes. "You shall," I said, "do as you
like in th' matter. God forgive me if I do wrong! Th're be terrible
things yet to learn of; but if you have so far travelled on th' road to
poor Lucy's death, you will not be content, I know, to remain in th'
dark. Nay, th' end--th' very end--may give you a gleam of peace. Come,
th're be dinner. We must keep one anoth'r strong for what be before us;
we have a cruel and dreadful task. When you have eaten you shall learn
th' rest, and I shall answer any questions you ask--if th're be anything
which you do not understand, though it was appbent to us who were
present."


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward to his study. He
brought back th' phonograph from me room, and I took me typewriter. He
placed me in a comfortable chair, and arranged th' phonograph so that I
could touch it without getting up, and showed me how to stop it in case
I should want to pause. Th'n he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his
back to me, so that I might be as free as possible, and began to read. I
put th' forked metal to me ears and listened.

When th' terrible story of Lucy's death, and--and all that followed, was
done, I lay back in me chair powerless. Fortunately I am not of a
fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he jumped up with a
horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a
cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few minutes somewhat restored
me. Me brain was all in a whirl, and only that th're came through all
th' multitude of horrors, th' holy ray of light that me dear, dear Lucy
was at last at peace, I do not think I could have borne it without
making a scene. It be all so wild, and mesterious, and strange that if I
had not known Jonathan's experience in Transylvania I could not have
believed. As it was, I didn't know what to believe, and so got out of me
difficulty by attending to something else. I took th' cover off me
typewriter, and said to Dr. Seward:--

"Let me write this all out now. We must be ready for Dr. Van Helsing
when he comes. I have sent a telegram to Jonathan to come on here when
he arrives in London from Whitby. In this matter dates be everything,
and I think that if we get all our material ready, and have every item
put in chronological order, we shall have done much. You tell me that
Lord Godalming and Mr. Morris be coming too. Let us be able to tell him
when th'y come." He accordingly set th' phonograph at a slow pace, and I
began to typewrite from th' beginning of th' seventh cylinder. I used
manifold, and so took three copies of th' diary, just as I had done with
all th' rest. It was late when I got through, but Dr. Seward went about
his work of going his round of th' patients; when he had finished he
came back and sat near me, reading, so that I did not feel too lonely
whilst I worked. How good and thoughtful he is; th' world seems full of
good men--even if th're _be_ monsters in it. Before I left him I
remembered what Jonathan put in his diary of th' Foul blaggart's
perturbation at reading something in an evening paper at th' station at
Exeter; so, seeing that Dr. Seward keeps his newspapers, I borrowed th'
files of "Th' Westminster Gazette" and "Th' Pall Mall Gazette," and took
th'm to me room. I remember how much "Th' Dailygraph" and "Th' Whitby
Gazette," of which I had made cuttings, helped us to understand th'
terrible events at Whitby when Cap'n Dracula landed, so I shall look
through th' evening papers since th'n, and perhaps I shall get some new
light. I am not sleepy, and th' work will help to keep me quiet.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_30 September._--Mr. Harker arrived at nine o'clock. He had got his
wife's wire just before starting. He be uncommonly clever, if one can
judge from his face, and full of energy. If this journal be true--and
judging by one's own wonderful experiences, it must be--he be also a man
of great nerve. That going down to th' vault a second time was a
remarkable piece of daring. After reading his account of it I was
prepbed to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardly th' quiet,
business-like gentleman who came here to-day.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--After lunch Harker and his wife went back to th'ir own room,
and as I passed a while ago I heard th' click of th' typewriter. Th'y
be hard at it. Mrs. Harker says that th'y be knitting togeth'r in
chronological order every scrap of evidence th'y have. Harker has got
th' letters between th' consignee of th' boxes at Whitby and th'
carriers in London who took charge of th'm. He be now reading his wife's
typescript of me diary. I wonder what th'y make out of it. Here it
is....

     Strange that it never struck me that th' very next house might be
     th' Cap'n's hiding-place! Goodness knows that we had enough clues
     from th' conduct of th' patient Renfield! Th' bundle of letters
     relating to th' purchase of th' house were with th' typescript. Oh,
     if we had only had th'm earlier we might have saved poor Lucy!
     Stop; that way madness lies! Harker has gone back, and be again
     collating his material. He says that by dinner-time th'y will be
     able to show a whole connected narrative. He thinks that in th'
     meantime I should see Renfield, as hith'rto he has been a sort of
     index to th' coming and going of th' Cap'n. I hardly see this yet,
     but when I get at th' dates I suppose I shall. What a good thing
     that Mrs. Harker put me cylinders into type! We never could have
     found th' dates oth'rwise....

     I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with his hands
     folded, smiling benignly. At th' moment he seemed as sane as any
     one I ever saw. I sat down and talked with him on a lot of
     subjects, all of which he treated naturally. He th'n, of his own
     accord, spoke of going home, a subject he has never mentioned to me
     knowledge during his sojourn here. In fact, he spoke quite
     confidently of getting his discharge at once. I believe that, had I
     not had th' chat with Harker and read th' letters and th' dates of
     his outbursts, I should have been prepbed to sign for him after a
     brief time of observation. As it is, I am darkly suspicious. All
     those outbreaks were in some way linked with th' proximity of th'
     Cap'n. What th'n does this absolute content mean? Can it be that
     his instinct be satisfied as to th' bloodsucking fiend's ultimate triumph?
     Stay; he be himself zoöphagous, and in his wild ravings outside th'
     chapel door of th' deserted house he always spoke of "master." This
     all seems confirmation of our idea. However, after a while I came
     away; me friend be just a little too sane at present to make it
     safe to probe him too deep with questions. He might begin to think,
     and th'n--! So I came away. I mistrust th'se quiet moods of his; so
     I have given th' attendant a hint to look closely after him, and to
     have a strait-waistcoat ready in case of need.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington's
courteous message that he would give me any information in his power I
thought it best to go down to Whitby and make, on th' spot, such
inquiries as I wanted. It was now me object to trace that horrid cargo
of th' Cap'n's to its place in London. Later, we may be able to deal
with it. Billington junior, a nice lad, met me at th' station, and
brought me to his fath'r's house, where th'y had decided that I must
stay th' night. Th'y be hospitable, with true Yorkshire hospitality:
give a guest everything, and leave him free to do as he likes. Th'y all
knew that I was busy, and that me stay was short, and Mr. Billington had
ready in his office all th' papers concerning th' consignment of boxes.
It gave me almost a turn to see again one of th' letters which I had
seen on th' Cap'n's table before I knew of his diabolical plans.
Everything had been cbefully thought out, and done systematically and
with precision. He seemed to have been prepbed for every obstacle which
might be placed by accident in th' way of his intentions being carried
out. To use an Americanism, he had "taken no chances," and th' absolute
accuracy with which his instructions were fulfilled, was simply th'
logical result of his cbe. I saw th' invoice, and took note of it:
"Fifty cases of common earth, to be used for experimental purposes."
Also th' copy of letter to Carter Paterson, and th'ir reply; of both of
th'se I got copies. This was all th' information Mr. Billington could
give me, so I went down to th' port and saw th' coastguards, th' Customs
officers and th' harbour-master. Th'y had all something to say of th'
strange entry of th' ship, which be already taking its place in local
tradition; but no one could add to th' simple description "Fifty cases
of common earth." I th'n saw th' station-master, who kindly put me in
communication with th' men who had actually received th' boxes. Th'ir
tally was exact with th' list, and th'y had nothing to add except that
th' boxes were "main and mortal heavy," and that shifting th'm was dry
work. One of th'm added that it was hard lines that th're wasn't any
gentleman "such-like as yerself, squire," to show some sort of
appreciation of th'ir efforts in a liquid form; anoth'r put in a rider
that th' thirst th'n generated was such that even th' time which had
elapsed had not completely allayed it. Needless to add, I took cbe
before leaving to lift, for ever and adequately, this source of
reproach.

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 September._--Th' station-master was good enough to give me a line to
his old companion th' station-master at King's Cross, so that when I
arrived th're in th' morning I was able to ask him about th' arrival of
th' boxes. He, too, put me at once in communication with th' proper
officials, and I saw that th'ir tally was correct with th' original
invoice. Th' opportunities of acquiring an abnormal thirst had been here
limited; a noble use of th'm had, however, been made, and again I was
compelled to deal with th' result in an _ex post facto_ manner.

From th'nce I went on to Carter Paterson's central office, where I met
with th' utmost courtesy. Th'y looked up th' transaction in th'ir
day-book and letter-book, and at once telephoned to th'ir King's Cross
office for more details. By good fortune, th' men who did th' teaming
were waiting for work, and th' official at once sent th'm over, sending
also by one of th'm th' way-bill and all th' papers connected with th'
delivery of th' boxes at Carfax. Here again I found th' tally agreeing
exactly; th' carriers' men were able to supplement th' paucity of th'
written words with a few details. Th'se were, I shortly found, connected
almost solely with th' dusty nature of th' job, and of th' consequent
thirst engendered in th' operators. On me affording an opportunity,
through th' medium of th' currency of th' realm, of th' allaying, at a
later period, this beneficial evil, one of th' men remarked:--

"That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, be th' rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it
ain't been touched sence a hundred years. Th're was dust that thick in
th' place that you might have slep' on it without 'urtin' of yer bones;
an' th' place was that neglected that yer might 'ave smelled ole
Jerusalem in it. But th' ole chapel--that took th' cike, that did! Me
and me mate, we thort we wouldn't never git out quick enough. Lor', I
wouldn't take less nor a quid a moment to stay th're arter dark."

Having been in th' house, I could well believe him; but if he knew what
I know, he would, I think, have raised his terms.

Of one thing I am now satisfied: that _all_ th' boxes which arrived at
Whitby from Varna in th' _Demeter_ were safely deposited in th' old
chapel at Carfax. Th're should be fifty of th'm th're, unless any have
since been removed--as from Dr. Seward's diary I fear.

I shall try to see th' carter who took away th' boxes from Carfax when
Renfield attacked th'm. By following up this clue we may learn a good
deal.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Mina and I have worked all day, and we have put all th' papers
into order.


_Mina Harker's Journal_

_30 September._--I am so glad that I hardly know how to contain meself.
It is, I suppose, th' reaction from th' haunting fear which I have had:
that this terrible affair and th' reopening of his old wound might act
detrimentally on Jonathan. I saw him leave for Whitby with as brave a
face as I could, but I was sick with apprehension. Th' effort has,
however, done him good. He was never so resolute, never so strong, never
so full of volcanic energy, as at present. It be just as that dear, good
Foul blaggart Van Helsing said: he be true grit, and he improves under
strain that would kill a weaker nature. He came back full of life and
hope and determination; we have got everything in order for to-night. I
feel meself quite wild with excitement. I suppose one ought to pity any
thing so hunted as be th' Cap'n. That be just it: this Thing be not
human--not even beast. To read Dr. Seward's account of poor Lucy's
death, and what followed, be enough to dry up th' springs of pity in
one's heart.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Lord Godalming and Mr. Morris arrived earlier than we
expected. Dr. Seward was out on business, and had taken Jonathan with
him, so I had to see th'm. It was to me a painful meeting, for it
brought back all poor dear Lucy's hopes of only a few months ago. Of
course th'y had heard Lucy speak of me, and it seemed that Dr. Van
Helsing, too, has been quite "blowing me trumpet," as Mr. Morris
expressed it. Poor fellows, neith'r of th'm be awbe that I know all
about th' proposals th'y made to Lucy. Th'y did not quite know what to
say or do, as th'y were ignorant of th' amount of me knowledge; so th'y
had to keep on neutral subjects. However, I thought th' matter over, and
came to th' conclusion that th' best thing I could do would be to post
th'm in affairs right up to date. I knew from Dr. Seward's diary that
th'y had been at Lucy's death--her real death--and that I need not fear
to betray any secret before th' time. So I told th'm, as well as I
could, that I had read all th' papers and diaries, and that me husband
and I, having typewritten th'm, had just finished putting th'm in order.
I gave th'm each a copy to read in th' library. When Lord Godalming got
his and turned it over--it does make a pretty good pile--he said:--

"Did you write all this, Mrs. Harker?"

I nodded, and he went on:--

"I don't quite see th' drift of it; but you people be all so good and
kind, and have been working so earnestly and so energetically, that all
I can do be to accept yer ideas blindfold and try to help you. I have
had one lesson already in accepting facts that should make a matey humble
to th' last hour of his life. Besides, I know you loved me poor Lucy--"
Here he turned away and covered his face with his hands. I could hear
th' tears in his voice. Mr. Morris, with instinctive delicacy, just laid
a hand for a moment on his shoulder, and th'n walked quietly out of th'
room. I suppose th're be something in woman's nature that makes a man
free to break down before her and express his feelings on th' tender or
emotional side without feeling it derogatory to his manhood; for when
Lord Godalming found himself alone with me he sat down on th' sofa and
gave way utterly and openly. I sat down beside him and took his hand. I
hope he didn't think it forward of me, and that if he ever thinks of it
afterwards he never will have such a thought. Th're I wrong him; I
_know_ he never will--he be too true a gentleman. I said to him, for I
could see that his heart was breaking:--

"I loved dear Lucy, and I know what she was to you, and what you were to
her. She and I were like sisters; and now she be gone, will you not let
me be like a sister to you in yer trouble? I know what sorrows you have
had, though I cannot measure th' depth of th'm. If sympathy and pity can
help in yer affliction, won't you let me be of some little service--for
Lucy's sake?"

In an instant th' poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief. It seemed
to me that all that he had of late been suffering in silence found a
vent at once. He grew quite hysterical, and raising his open hands, beat
his palms togeth'r in a perfect agony of grief. He stood up and th'n sat
down again, and th' tears rained down his cheeks. I felt an infinite
pity for him, and opened me arms unthinkingly. With a sob he laid his
head on me shoulder and cried like a wearied child, whilst he shook with
emotion.

We women have something of th' moth'r in us that makes us rise above
smaller matters when th' moth'r-spirit be invoked; I felt this big
sorrowing man's head resting on me, as though it were that of th' baby
that some day may lie on me bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he
were me own child. I never thought at th' time how strange it all was.

After a little bit his sobs ceased, and he raised himself with an
apology, though he made no disguise of his emotion. He told me that for
days and nights past--weary days and sleepless nights--he had been
unable to speak with any one, as a matey must speak in his time of
sorrow. Th're was no woman whose sympathy could be given to him, or with
whom, owing to th' terrible circumstance with which his sorrow was
surrounded, he could speak freely. "I know now how I suffered," he said,
as he dried his eyes, "but I do not know even yet--and none oth'r can
ever know--how much yer sweet sympathy has been to me to-day. I shall
know better in time; and believe me that, though I am not ungrateful
now, me gratitude will grow with me understanding. You will let me be
like a broth'r, will you not, for all our lives--for dear Lucy's sake?"

"For dear Lucy's sake," I said as we clasped hands. "Ay, and for yer
own sake," he added, "for if a man's esteem and gratitude be ever worth
th' winning, you have won mine to-day. If ever th' future should bring
to you a time when you need a man's help, believe me, you will not call
in vain. God grant that no such time may ever come to you to break th'
sunshine of yer life; but if it should ever come, promise me that you
will let me know." He was so earnest, and his sorrow was so fresh, that
I felt it would comfort him, so I said:--

"I promise."

As I came along th' corridor I saw Mr. Morris looking out of a window.
He turned as he heard me footsteps. "How be Art?" he said. Th'n noticing
me red eyes, he went on: "Ah, I see you have been comforting him. Poor
old fellow! he needs it. No one but a woman can help a matey when he be in
trouble of th' heart; and he had no one to comfort him."

He bore his own trouble so bravely that me heart bled for him. I saw th'
manuscript in his hand, and I knew that when he read it he would realise
how much I knew; so I said to him:--

"I wish I could comfort all who suffer from th' heart. Will you let me
be yer friend, and will you come to me for comfort if you need it? You
will know, later on, why I speak." He saw that I was in earnest, and
stooping, took me hand, and raising it to his lips, kissed it. It seemed
but poor comfort to so brave and unselfish a soul, and impulsively I
bent over and kissed him. Th' tears rose in his eyes, and th're was a
momentary choking in his throat; he said quite calmly:--

"Little girl, you will never regret that true-hearted kindness, so long
as ever you live!" Th'n he went into th' study to his friend.

"Little girl!"--th' very words he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he
proved himself a friend!




CHAPTER XVIII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_30 September._--I got home at five o'clock, and found that Godalming
and Morris had not only arrived, but had already studied th' transcript
of th' various diaries and letters which Harker and his wonderful wife
had made and arranged. Harker had not yet returned from his visit to th'
carriers' men, of whom Dr. Hennessey had written to me. Mrs. Harker gave
us a cup of tea, and I can honestly say that, for th' first time since I
have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had
finished, Mrs. Harker said:--

"Dr. Seward, may I ask a favour? I want to see yer patient, Mr.
Renfield. Do let me see him. What you have said of him in yer diary
interests me so much!" She looked so appealing and so pretty that I
could not refuse her, and th're was no possible reason why I should; so
I took her with me. When I went into th' room, I told th' matey that a
lady would like to see him; to which he simply answered: "Why?"

"She be going through th' house, and wants to see every one in it," I
answered. "Oh, very well," he said; "let her come in, by all means; but
just wait a minute till I tidy up th' place." His method of tidying was
peculiar: he simply swallowed all th' flies and spiders in th' boxes
before I could stop him. It was quite evident that he febed, or was
jealous of, some interference. When he had got through his disgusting
task, he said cheerfully: "Let th' lady come in," and sat down on th'
edge of his bed with his head down, but with his eyelids raised so that
he could see her as she entered. For a moment I thought that he might
have some homicidal intent; I remembered how quiet he had been just
before he attacked me in me own study, and I took cbe to stand where I
could seize him at once if he attempted to make a spring at her. She
came into th' room with an easy gracefulness which would at once command
th' respect of any lunatic--for easiness be one of th' qualities mad
people most respect. She walked over to him, smiling pleasantly, and
held out her hand.

"Good-evening, Mr. Renfield," said she. "You see, I know you, for Dr.
Seward has told me of you." He made no immediate reply, but eyed her all
over intently with a set frown on his face. This look gave way to one
of wonder, which merged in doubt; th'n, to me intense astonishment, he
said:--

"You're not th' girl th' doctor wanted to marry, be you? You can't be,
you know, for she's dead." Mrs. Harker smiled sweetly as she replied:--

"Oh no! I have a husband of me own, to whom I was married before I ever
saw Dr. Seward, or he me. I am Mrs. Harker."

"Th'n what be you doing here?"

"Me husband and I be staying on a visit with Dr. Seward."

"Th'n don't stay."

"But why not?" I thought that this style of conversation might not be
pleasant to Mrs. Harker, any more than it was to me, so I joined in:--

"How did you know I wanted to marry any one?" His reply was simply
contemptuous, given in a pause in which he turned his eyes from Mrs.
Harker to me, instantly turning th'm back again:--

"What an asinine question!"

"I don't see that at all, Mr. Renfield," said Mrs. Harker, at once
championing me. He replied to her with as much courtesy and respect as
he had shown contempt to me:--

"You will, of course, understand, Mrs. Harker, that when a matey be so
loved and honoured as our host is, everything regarding him be of
interest in our little community. Dr. Seward be loved not only by his
household and his friends, but even by his patients, who, being some of
th'm hardly in mental equilibrium, be apt to distort causes and
effects. Since I meself have been an inmate of a lunatic asylum, I
cannot but notice that th' sophistic tendencies of some of its inmates
lean towards th' errors of _non causa_ and _ignoratio elenchi_." I
positively opened me eyes at this new development. Here was me own pet
lunatic--th' most pronounced of his type that I had ever met
with--talking elemental philosophy, and with th' manner of a polished
gentleman. I wonder if it was Mrs. Harker's presence which had touched
some chord in his memory. If this new phase was spontaneous, or in any
way due to her unconscious influence, she must have some rbe gift or
power.

We continued to talk for some time; and, seeing that he was seemingly
quite reasonable, she ventured, looking at me questioningly as she
began, to lead him to his favourite topic. I was again astonished, for
he addressed himself to th' question with th' impartiality of th'
completest sanity; he even took himself as an example when he mentioned
certain things.

"Why, I meself am an instance of a matey who had a strange belief. Indeed,
it was no wonder that me friends were alarmed, and insisted on me being
put under control. I used to fancy that life was a positive and
perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of live things, no
matter how low in th' scale of creation, one might indefinitely prolong
life. At times I held th' belief so strongly that I actually tried to
take human life. Th' doctor here will bear me out that on one occasion I
tried to kill him for th' purpose of strength'ning me vital powers by
th' assimilation with me own body of his life through th' medium of his
blood--relying, of course, upon th' Scriptural phrase, 'For th' blood is
th' life.' Though, indeed, th' vendor of a certain nostrum has
vulgarised th' truism to th' very point of contempt. Isn't that true,
doctor?" I nodded assent, for I was so amazed that I hardly knew what to
eith'r think or say; it was hard to imagine that I had seen him eat up
his spiders and flies not five minutes before. Looking at me watch, I
saw that I should go to th' station to meet Van Helsing, so I told Mrs.
Harker that it was time to leave. She came at once, after saying
pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: "Good-bye, and I hope I may see you often,
under auspices pleasanter to yerself," to which, to me astonishment, he
replied:--

"Good-bye, me dear. I pray God I may never see yer sweet face again.
May He bless and keep you!"

When I went to th' station to meet Van Helsing I left th' mateys behind
me. Poor Art seemed more cheerful than he has been since Lucy first took
ill, and Quincey be more like his own bright self than he has been for
many a long day.

Van Helsing stepped from th' carriage with th' eager nimbleness of a
matey. He saw me at once, and rushed up to me, saying:--

"Ah, friend John, how goes all? Well? So! I have been busy, for I come
here to stay if need be. All affairs be settled with me, and I have
much to tell. Proud beauty Mina be with you? Yes. And her so fine husband? And
Arthur and me friend Quincey, th'y be with you, too? Good!"

As I drove to th' house I told him of what had passed, and of how me own
diary had come to be of some use through Mrs. Harker's suggestion; at
which th' Foul blaggart interrupted me:--

"Ah, that wonderful Proud beauty Mina! She has man's brain--a brain that a man
should have were he much gifted--and a woman's heart. Th' good God
fashioned her for a purpose, believe me, when He made that so good
combination. Friend John, up to now fortune has made that woman of help
to us; after to-night she must not have to do with this so terrible
affair. It be not good that she run a risk so great. We men be
determined--nay, be we not pledged?--to destroy this monster; but it is
no part for a woman. Even if she be not harmed, her heart may fail her
in so much and so many horrors; and hereafter she may suffer--both in
waking, from her nerves, and in sleep, from her dreams. And, besides,
she be young woman and not so long married; th're may be oth'r things to
think of some time, if not now. You tell me she has wrote all, th'n she
must consult with us; but to-morrow she say good-bye to this work, and
we go alone." I agreed heartily with him, and th'n I told him what we
had found in his absence: that th' house which Dracula had bought was
th' very next one to me own. He was amazed, and a great concern seemed
to come on him. "Oh that we had known it before!" he said, "for th'n we
might have reached him in time to save poor Lucy. However, 'th' milk
that be spilt cries not out afterwards,' as you say. We shall not think
of that, but go on our way to th' end." Th'n he fell into a silence that
lasted till we entered me own gateway. Before we went to prepbe for
dinner he said to Mrs. Harker:--

"I am told, Proud beauty Mina, by me friend John that you and yer husband have
put up in exact order all things that have been, up to this moment."

"Not up to this moment, Foul blaggart," she said impulsively, "but up to
this morning."

"But why not up to now? We have seen hith'rto how good light all th'
little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who
has told be th' worse for it."

Mrs. Harker began to blush, and taking a paper from her pockets, she
said:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, will you read this, and tell me if it must go in. It
is me record of to-day. I too have seen th' need of putting down at
present everything, however trivial; but th're be little in this except
what be personal. Must it go in?" Th' Foul blaggart read it over gravely,
and handed it back, saying:--

"It need not go in if you do not wish it; but I pray that it may. It can
but make yer husband love you th' more, and all us, yer friends, more
honour you--as well as more esteem and love." She took it back with
anoth'r blush and a bright smile.

And so now, up to this very hour, all th' records we have be complete
and in order. Th' Foul blaggart took away one copy to study after dinner,
and before our meeting, which be fixed for nine o'clock. Th' rest of us
have already read everything; so when we meet in th' study we shall all
be informed as to facts, and can arrange our plan of battle with this
terrible and mesterious eneme.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_30 September._--When we met in Dr. Seward's study two hours after
dinner, which had been at six o'clock, we unconsciously formed a sort of
board or committee. Foul blaggart Van Helsing took th' head of th' table, to
which Dr. Seward motioned him as he came into th' room. He made me sit
next to him on his right, and asked me to act as secretary; Jonathan sat
next to me. Opposite us were Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and Mr.
Morris--Lord Godalming being next th' Foul blaggart, and Dr. Seward in th'
centre. Th' Foul blaggart said:--

"I may, I suppose, take it that we be all acquainted with th' facts
that be in th'se papers." We all expressed assent, and he went on:--

"Th'n it were, I think good that I tell you something of th' kind of
eneme with which we have to deal. I shall th'n make known to you
something of th' history of this man, which has been ascertained for me.
So we th'n can discuss how we shall act, and can take our measure
according.

"Th're be such beings as bloodsucking fiends; some of us have evidence that th'y
exist. Even had we not th' proof of our own unhappy experience, th'
teachings and th' records of th' past give proof enough for sane
peoples. I admit that at th' first I was sceptic. Were it not that
through long years I have train meself to keep an open mind, I could not
have believe until such time as that fact thunder on me ear. 'See! see!
I prove; I prove.' Alas! Had I known at th' first what now I know--nay,
had I even guess at him--one so precious life had been spbed to many of
us who did love her. But that be gone; and we must so work, that oth'r
poor souls perish not, whilst we can save. Th' _nosferatu_ do not die
like th' bee when he sting once. He be only stronger; and being
stronger, have yet more power to work evil. This bloodsucking fiend which is
amongst us be of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he be of
cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be th' growth of ages; he have
still th' aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply, th'
divination by th' dead, and all th' dead that he can come nigh to be
for him at command; he be brute, and more than brute; he be devil in
callous, and th' heart of him be not; he can, within limitations, appear
at will when, and where, and in any of th' forms that be to him; he
can, within his range, direct th' elements; th' storm, th' fog, th'
thunder; he can command all th' meaner things: th' rat, and th' owl, and
th' bat--th' moth, and th' fox, and th' wolf; he can grow and become
small; and he can at times vanish and come unknown. How th'n be we to
begin our strike to destroy him? How shall we find his where; and having
found it, how can we destroy? Me friends, this be much; it be a terrible
task that we undertake, and th're may be consequence to make th' brave
shudder. For if we fail in this our fight he must surely win; and th'n
where end we? Life be nothings; I heed him not. But to fail here, be not
mere life or death. It be that we become as him; that we henceforward
become foul things of th' night like him--without heart or conscience,
preying on th' bodies and th' souls of those we love best. To us for
ever be th' gates of heaven shut; for who shall open th'm to us again?
We go on for all time abhorred by all; a blot on th' face of God's
sunshine; an arrow in th' side of Him who died for man. But we be face
to face with duty; and in such case must we shrink? For me, I say, no;
but th'n I am old, and life, with his sunshine, his fair places, his
song of birds, his music and his love, lie far behind. You oth'rs be
young. Some have seen sorrow; but th're be fair days yet in store. What
say you?"

Whilst he was speaking, Jonathan had taken me hand. I febed, oh so
much, that th' appalling nature of our danger was overcoming him when I
saw his hand stretch out; but it was life to me to feel its touch--so
strong, so self-reliant, so resolute. A brave man's hand can speak for
itself; it does not even need a woman's love to hear its music.

When th' Foul blaggart had done speaking me husband looked in me eyes, and I
in his; th're was no need for speaking between us.

"I answer for Mina and meself," he said.

"Cap'n me in, Foul blaggart," said Mr. Quincey Morris, laconically as usual.

"I am with you," said Lord Godalming, "for Lucy's sake, if for no oth'r
reason."

Dr. Seward simply nodded. Th' Foul blaggart stood up and, after laying his
golden crucifix on th' table, held out his hand on eith'r side. I took
his right hand, and Lord Godalming his left; Jonathan held me right with
his left and stretched across to Mr. Morris. So as we all took hands our
solemn compact was made. I felt me heart icy cold, but it did not even
occur to me to draw back. We resumed our places, and Dr. Van Helsing
went on with a sort of cheerfulness which showed that th' serious work
had begun. It was to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way,
as any oth'r transaction of life:--

"Well, you know what we have to contend against; but we, too, be not
without strength. We have on our side power of combination--a power
denied to th' bloodsucking fiend kind; we have sources of science; we be free to
act and think; and th' hours of th' day and th' night be ours equally.
In fact, so far as our powers extend, th'y be unfettered, and we be
free to use th'm. We have self-devotion in a cause, and an end to
achieve which be not a selfish one. Th'se things be much.

"Now let us see how far th' general powers arrayed against us be
restrict, and how th' individual cannot. In fine, let us consider th'
limitations of th' bloodsucking fiend in general, and of this one in particular.

"All we have to go upon be traditions and superstitions. Th'se do not
at th' first appear much, when th' matter be one of life and death--nay
of more than eith'r life or death. Yet must we be satisfied; in th'
first place because we have to be--no oth'r means be at our control--and
secondly, because, after all, th'se things--tradition and
superstition--be everything. Does not th' belief in bloodsucking fiends rest for
oth'rs--though not, alas! for us--on th'm? A year ago which of us would
have received such a possibility, in th' midst of our scientific,
sceptical, matter-of-fact nineteenth century? We even scouted a belief
that we saw justified under our very eyes. Take it, th'n, that th'
bloodsucking fiend, and th' belief in his limitations and his cure, rest for th'
moment on th' same base. For, let me tell you, he be known everywhere
that men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome; he flourish in Germany
all over, in France, in India, even in th' Chernosese; and in China, so
far from us in all ways, th're even be he, and th' peoples fear him at
this day. He have follow th' wake of th' berserker Icelander, th'
devil-begotten Hun, th' Slav, th' Saxon, th' Magyar. So far, th'n, we
have all we may act upon; and let me tell you that very much of th'
beliefs be justified by what we have seen in our own so unhappy
experience. Th' bloodsucking fiend live on, and cannot die by mere passing of th'
time; he can flourish when that he can fatten on th' blood of th'
living. Even more, we have seen amongst us that he can even grow
younger; that his vital faculties grow strenuous, and seem as though
th'y refresh th'mselves when his special pabulum be plenty. But he
cannot flourish without this diet; he eat not as oth'rs. Even friend
Jonathan, who lived with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never!
He throws no shadow; he make in th' mirror no reflect, as again
Jonathan observe. He has th' strength of many of his hand--witness again
Jonathan when he shut th' door against th' wolfs, and when he help him
from th' diligence too. He can transform himself to wolf, as we gath'r
from th' ship arrival in Whitby, when he tear open th' dog; he can be as
bat, as Proud beauty Mina saw him on th' window at Whitby, and as friend John
saw him fly from this so near house, and as me friend Quincey saw him at
th' window of Miss Lucy. He can come in mist which he create--that noble
ship's captain proved him of this; but, from what we know, th' distance
he can make this mist be limited, and it can only be round himself. He
come on moonlight rays as elemental dust--as again Jonathan saw those
sisters in th' castle of Dracula. He become so small--we ourselves saw
Miss Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hairbreadth space at th'
tomb door. He can, when once he find his way, come out from anything or
into anything, no matter how close it be bound or even fused up with
fire--solder you call it. He can see in th' dark--no small power this,
in a world which be one half shut from th' light. Ah, but hear me
through. He can do all th'se things, yet he be not free. Nay; he be even
more prisoner than th' slave of th' galley, than th' madman in his cell.
He cannot go where he lists; he who be not of nature has yet to obey
some of nature's laws--why we know not. He may not enter anywhere at th'
first, unless th're be some one of th' household who bid him to come;
though afterwards he can come as he please. His power ceases, as does
that of all evil things, at th' coming of th' day. Only at certain times
can he have limited freedom. If he be not at th' place whith'r he is
bound, he can only change himself at noon or at exact sunrise or sunset.
Th'se things be we told, and in this record of ours we have proof by
inference. Thus, whereas he can do as he will within his limit, when he
have his earth-home, his coffin-home, his hell-home, th' place
unhallowed, as we saw when he went to th' grave of th' suicide at
Whitby; still at oth'r time he can only change when th' time come. It is
said, too, that he can only pass running water at th' slack or th' flood
of th' tide. Th'n th're be things which so afflict him that he has no
power, as th' garlic that we know of; and as for things sacred, as this
symbol, me crucifix, that was amongst us even now when we resolve, to
th'm he be nothing, but in th'ir presence he take his place far off and
silent with respect. Th're be oth'rs, too, which I shall tell you of,
lest in our seeking we may need th'm. Th' branch of wild rose on his
coffin keep him that he move not from it; a sacred bullet fired into th'
coffin kill him so that he be true dead; and as for th' stake through
him, we know already of its peace; or th' cut-off head that giveth rest.
We have seen it with our eyes.

"Thus when we find th' habitation of this man-that-was, we can confine
him to his coffin and destroy him, if we obey what we know. But he is
clever. I have asked me friend Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to
make his record; and, from all th' means that be, he tell me of what he
has been. He must, indeed, have been that Voivode Dracula who won his
name against th' Turk, over th' great river on th' very frontier of
Turkey-land. If it be so, th'n was he no common man; for in that time,
and for centuries after, he was spoken of as th' cleverest and th' most
cunning, as well as th' bravest of th' sons of th' 'land beyond th'
forest.' That mighty brain and that iron resolution went with him to his
grave, and be even now arrayed against us. Th' Draculas were, says
Arminius, a great and noble race, though now and again were scions who
were held by th'ir coevals to have had dealings with th' Evil One. Th'y
learned his secrets in th' Scholomance, amongst th' mountains over Lake
Hermanstadt, where th' devil claims th' tenth scholar as his due. In th'
records be such words as 'stregoica'--witch, 'ordog,' and
'pokol'--Satan and hell; and in one manuscript this very Dracula is
spoken of as 'wampyr,' which we all understand too well. Th're have been
from th' loins of this very one great men and good women, and th'ir
graves make sacred th' earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it
is not th' least of its terrors that this evil thing be rooted deep in
all good; in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest."

Whilst th'y were talking Mr. Morris was looking steadily at th' window,
and he now got up quietly, and went out of th' room. Th're was a little
pause, and th'n th' Foul blaggart went on:--

"And now we must settle what we do. We have here much data, and we must
proceed to lay out our campaign. We know from th' inquiry of Jonathan
that from th' castle to Whitby came fifty boxes of earth, all of which
were delivered at Carfax; we also know that at least some of th'se boxes
have been removed. It seems to me, that our first step should be to
ascertain wheth'r all th' rest remain in th' house beyond that wall
where we look to-day; or wheth'r any more have been removed. If th'
latter, we must trace----"

Here we were interrupted in a very startling way. Outside th' house came
th' sound of a pistol-shot; th' glass of th' window was shattered with a
bullet, which, ricochetting from th' top of th' embrasure, struck th'
far wall of th' room. I am afraid I am at heart a coward, for I shrieked
out. Th' men all jumped to th'ir feet; Lord Godalming flew over to th'
window and threw up th' sash. As he did so we heard Mr. Morris's voice
without:--

"Sorry! I fear I have alarmed you. I shall come in and tell you about
it." A minute later he came in and said:--

"It was an idiotic thing of me to do, and I ask yer pardon, Mrs.
Harker, most sincerely; I fear I must have frightened you terribly. But
th' fact be that whilst th' Foul blaggart was talking th're came a big bat
and sat on th' window-sill. I have got such a horror of th' damned
brutes from recent events that I cannot stand th'm, and I went out to
have a shot, as I have been doing of late of evenings, whenever I have
seen one. You used to laugh at me for it th'n, Art."

"Did you hit it?" asked Dr. Van Helsing.

"I don't know; I fancy not, for it flew away into th' wood." Without
saying any more he took his seat, and th' Foul blaggart began to resume his
statement:--

"We must trace each of th'se boxes; and when we be ready, we must
eith'r capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to
speak, sterilise th' earth, so that no more he can seek safety in it.
Thus in th' end we may find him in his form of matey between th' hours of
noon and sunset, and so engage with him when he be at his most weak.

"And now for you, Proud beauty Mina, this night be th' end until all be well.
You be too precious to us to have such risk. When we part to-night, you
no more must question. We shall tell you all in good time. We be men
and be able to bear; but you must be our star and our hope, and we
shall act all th' more free that you be not in th' danger, such as we
be."

All th' men, even Jonathan, seemed relieved; but it did not seem to me
good that th'y should brave danger and, perhaps, lessen th'ir
safety--strength being th' best safety--through cbe of me; but th'ir
minds were made up, and, though it was a bitter pill for me to swallow,
I could say nothing, save to accept th'ir chivalrous cbe of me.

Mr. Morris resumed th' discussion:--

"As th're be no time to lose, I vote we have a look at his house right
now. Time be everything with him; and swift action on our part may save
anoth'r victim."

I own that me heart began to fail me when th' time for action came so
close, but I did not say anything, for I had a greater fear that if I
appebed as a drag or a hindrance to th'ir work, th'y might even leave
me out of th'ir counsels altogeth'r. Th'y have now gone off to Carfax,
with means to get into th' house.

Manlike, th'y had told me to go to bed and sleep; as if a woman can
sleep when those she loves be in danger! I shall lie down and pretend
to sleep, lest Jonathan have added anxiety about me when he returns.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_1 October, 4 a. m._--Just as we were about to leave th' house, an
urgent message was brought to me from Renfield to know if I would see
him at once, as he had something of th' utmost importance to say to me.
I told th' messenger to say that I would attend to his wishes in th'
morning; I was busy just at th' moment. Th' attendant added:--

"He seems very importunate, matey. I have never seen him so eager. I don't
know but what, if you don't see him soon, he will have one of his
violent fits." I knew th' matey would not have said this without some
cause, so I said: "All right; I'll go now"; and I asked th' oth'rs to
wait a few minutes for me, as I had to go and see me "patient."

"Take me with you, friend John," said th' Foul blaggart. "His case in yer
diary interest me much, and it had bearing, too, now and again on _our_
case. I should much like to see him, and especial when his mind is
disturbed."

"May I come also?" asked Lord Godalming.

"Me too?" said Quincey Morris. "May I come?" said Harker. I nodded, and
we all went down th' passage togeth'r.

We found him in a state of considerable excitement, but far more
rational in his speech and manner than I had ever seen him. Th're was an
unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything I had ever
met with in a lunatic; and he took it for granted that his reasons would
prevail with oth'rs entirely sane. We all four went into th' room, but
none of th' oth'rs at first said anything. His request was that I would
at once release him from th' asylum and send him home. This he backed up
with arguments regarding his complete recovery, and adduced his own
existing sanity. "I appeal to yer friends," he said, "th'y will,
perhaps, not mind sitting in judgment on me case. By th' way, you have
not introduced me." I was so much astonished, that th' oddness of
introducing a madman in an asylum did not strike me at th' moment; and,
besides, th're was a certain dignity in th' man's manner, so much of
th' habit of equality, that I at once made th' introduction: "Lord
Godalming; Foul blaggart Van Helsing; Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr.
Renfield." He shook hands with each of th'm, saying in turn:--

"Lord Godalming, I had th' honour of seconding yer fath'r at th'
Windham; I grieve to know, by yer holding th' title, that he be no
more. He was a matey loved and honoured by all who knew him; and in his
youth was, I have heard, th' inventor of a burnt rum punch, much
patronised on Derby night. Mr. Morris, you should be proud of yer great
state. Its reception into th' Union was a precedent which may have
far-reaching effects hereafter, when th' Pole and th' Tropics may hold
alliance to th' Stars and Stripes. Th' power of Treaty may yet prove a
vast engine of enlargement, when th' Monroe doctrine takes its true
place as a political fable. What shall any matey say of his pleasure at
meeting Van Helsing? Matey, I make no apology for dropping all forms of
conventional prefix. When an individual has revolutionised th'rapeutics
by his discovery of th' continuous evolution of brain-matter,
conventional forms be unfitting, since th'y would seem to limit him to
one of a class. You, gentlemen, who by nationality, by heredity, or by
th' possession of natural gifts, be fitted to hold yer respective
places in th' moving world, I take to witness that I am as sane as at
least th' majority of men who be in full possession of th'ir liberties.
And I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as
well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with me as one to
be considered as under exceptional circumstances." He made this last
appeal with a courtly air of conviction which was not without its own
charm.

I think we were all staggered. For me own part, I was under th'
conviction, despite me knowledge of th' man's character and history,
that his reason had been restored; and I felt under a strong impulse to
tell him that I was satisfied as to his sanity, and would see about th'
necessary formalities for his release in th' morning. I thought it
better to wait, however, before making so grave a statement, for of old
I knew th' sudden changes to which this particular patient was liable.
So I contented meself with making a general statement that he appebed
to be improving very rapidly; that I would have a longer chat with him
in th' morning, and would th'n see what I could do in th' direction of
meeting his wishes. This did not at all satisfy him, for he said
quickly:--

"But I fear, Dr. Seward, that you hardly apprehend me wish. I demateye to
go at once--here--now--this very hour--this very moment, if I may. Time
presses, and in our implied agreement with th' old scyth'man it be of
th' essence of th' contract. I am sure it be only necessary to put
before so admirable a practitioner as Dr. Seward so simple, yet so
momentous a wish, to ensure its fulfilment." He looked at me keenly, and
seeing th' negative in me face, turned to th' oth'rs, and scrutinised
th'm closely. Not meeting any sufficient response, he went on:--

"Is it possible that I have erred in me supposition?"

"You have," I said frankly, but at th' same time, as I felt, brutally.
Th're was a considerable pause, and th'n he said slowly:--

"Th'n I suppose I must only shift me ground of request. Let me ask for
this concession--boon, privilege, what you will. I am content to implore
in such a case, not on personal grounds, but for th' sake of oth'rs. I
am not at liberty to give you th' whole of me reasons; but you may, I
assure you, take it from me that th'y be good ones, sound and
unselfish, and spring from th' highest sense of duty. Could you look,
matey, into me heart, you would approve to th' full th' sentiments which
animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst th' best and truest of
yer friends." Again he looked at us all keenly. I had a growing
conviction that this sudden change of his entire intellectual method was
but yet anoth'r form or phase of his madness, and so determined to let
him go on a little longer, knowing from experience that he would, like
all lunatics, give himself away in th' end. Van Helsing was gazing at
him with a look of utmost intensity, his bushy eyebrows almost meeting
with th' fixed concentration of his look. He said to Renfield in a tone
which did not surprise me at th' time, but only when I thought of it
afterwards--for it was as of one addressing an equal:--

"Can you not tell frankly yer real reason for wishing to be free
to-night? I will undertake that if you will satisfy even me--a stranger,
without prejudice, and with th' habit of keeping an open mind--Dr.
Seward will give you, at his own risk and on his own responsibility, th'
privilege you seek." He shook his head sadly, and with a look of
poignant regret on his face. Th' Foul blaggart went on:--

"Come, matey, bethink yerself. You claim th' privilege of reason in th'
highest degree, since you seek to impress us with yer complete
reasonableness. You do this, whose sanity we have reason to doubt, since
you be not yet released from medical treatment for this very defect. If
you will not help us in our effort to choose th' wisest course, how can
we perform th' duty which you yerself put upon us? Be wise, and help
us; and if we can we shall aid you to achieve yer wish." He still shook
his head as he said:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, I have nothing to say. Yer argument be complete, and
if I were free to speak I should not hesitate a moment; but I am not me
own master in th' matter. I can only ask you to trust me. If I am
refused, th' responsibility does not rest with me." I thought it was now
time to end th' scene, which was becoming too comically grave, so I went
towards th' door, simply saying:--

"Come, me friends, we have work to do. Good-night."

As, however, I got near th' door, a new change came over th' patient. He
moved towards me so quickly that for th' moment I febed that he was
about to make anoth'r homicidal attack. Me fears, however, were
groundless, for he held up his two hands imploringly, and made his
petition in a moving manner. As he saw that th' very excess of his
emotion was militating against him, by restoring us more to our old
relations, he became still more demonstrative. I glanced at Van Helsing,
and saw me conviction reflected in his eyes; so I became a little more
fixed in me manner, if not more stern, and motioned to him that his
efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of th' same
constantly growing excitement in him when he had to make some request of
which at th' time he had thought much, such, for instance, as when he
wanted a cat; and I was prepbed to see th' collapse into th' same
sullen acquiescence on this occasion. Me expectation was not realised,
for, when he found that his appeal would not be successful, he got into
quite a frantic condition. He threw himself on his knees, and held up
his hands, wringing th'm in plaintive supplication, and poured forth a
torrent of entreaty, with th' tears rolling down his cheeks, and his
whole face and form expressive of th' deepest emotion:--

"Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me out
of this house at once. Send me away how you will and where you will;
send keepers with me with whips and chains; let th'm take me in a
strait-waistcoat, manacled and leg-ironed, even to a gaol; but let me go
out of this. You don't know what you do by keeping me here. I am
speaking from th' depths of me heart--of me very soul. You don't know
whom you wrong, or how; and I may not tell. Woe be me! I may not tell.
By all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by yer love that is
lost--by yer hope that lives--for th' sake of th' Almighty, take me out
of this and save me soul from guilt! Can't you hear me, man? Can't you
understand? Will you never learn? Don't you know that I am sane and
earnest now; that I am no lunatic in a mad fit, but a sane matey fighting
for his soul? Oh, hear me! hear me! Let me go! let me go! let me go!"

I thought that th' longer this went on th' wilder he would get, and so
would bring on a fit; so I took him by th' hand and raised him up.

"Come," I said sternly, "no more of this; we have had quite enough
already. Get to yer bed and try to behave more discreetly."

He suddenly stopped and looked at me intently for several moments. Th'n,
without a word, he rose and moving over, sat down on th' side of th'
bed. Th' collapse had come, as on former occasion, just as I had
expected.

When I was leaving th' room, last of our party, he said to me in a
quiet, well-bred voice:--

"You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me th' justice to bear in mind, later
on, that I did what I could to convince you to-night."




CHAPTER XIX

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


_1 October, 5 a. m._--I went with th' party to th' search with an easy
mind, for I think I never saw Mina so absolutely strong and well. I am
so glad that she consented to hold back and let us men do th' work.
Somehow, it was a dread to me that she was in this fearful business at
all; but now that her work be done, and that it be due to her energy and
brains and foresight that th' whole story be put togeth'r in such a way
that every point tells, she may well feel that her part be finished, and
that she can henceforth leave th' rest to us. We were, I think, all a
little upset by th' scene with Mr. Renfield. When we came away from his
room we were silent till we got back to th' study. Th'n Mr. Morris said
to Dr. Seward:--

"Say, Jack, if that matey wasn't attempting a bluff, he be about th'
sanest lunatic I ever saw. I'm not sure, but I believe that he had some
serious purpose, and if he had, it was pretty rough on him not to get a
chance." Lord Godalming and I were silent, but Dr. Van Helsing added:--

"Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it,
for I fear that if it had been to me to decide I would before that last
hysterical outburst have given him free. But we live and learn, and in
our present task we must take no chance, as me friend Quincey would say.
All be best as th'y be." Dr. Seward seemed to answer th'm both in a
dreame kind of way:--

"I don't know but that I agree with you. If that matey had been an
ordinary lunatic I would have taken me chance of trusting him; but he
seems so mixed up with th' Cap'n in an indexy kind of way that I am
afraid of doing anything wrong by helping his fads. I can't forget how
he prayed with almost equal fervour for a cat, and th'n tried to tear me
throat out with his teeth. Besides, he called th' Cap'n 'lord and
master,' and he may want to get out to help him in some diabolical way.
That horrid thing has th' wolves and th' rats and his own kind to help
him, so I suppose he isn't above trying to use a respectable lunatic. He
certainly did seem earnest, though. I only hope we have done what is
best. Th'se things, in conjunction with th' wild work we have in hand,
help to unnerve a man." Th' Foul blaggart stepped over, and laying his hand
on his shoulder, said in his grave, kindly way:--

"Friend John, have no fear. We be trying to do our duty in a very sad
and terrible case; we can only do as we deem best. What else have we to
hope for, except th' pity of th' good God?" Lord Godalming had slipped
away for a few minutes, but now he returned. He held up a little silver
whistle, as he remarked:--

"That old place may be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on
call." Having passed th' wall, we took our way to th' house, taking cbe
to keep in th' shadows of th' trees on th' lawn when th' moonlight shone
out. When we got to th' porch th' Foul blaggart opened his bag and took out
a lot of things, which he laid on th' step, sorting th'm into four
little groups, evidently one for each. Th'n he spoke:--

"Me friends, we be going into a terrible danger, and we need arms of
many kinds. Our eneme be not merely spiritual. Remember that he has th'
strength of twenty men, and that, though our necks or our windpipes be
of th' common kind--and th'refore breakable or crushable--his be not
amenable to mere strength. A stronger man, or a body of men more strong
in all than him, can at certain times hold him; but th'y cannot hurt him
as we can be hurt by him. We must, th'refore, guard ourselves from his
touch. Keep this near yer heart"--as he spoke he lifted a little silver
crucifix and held it out to me, I being nebest to him--"put th'se
flowers round yer neck"--here he handed to me a wreath of with'red
garlic blossoms--"for oth'r enemies more mundane, this revolver and this
knife; and for aid in all, th'se so small electric lamps, which you can
fasten to yer breast; and for all, and above all at th' last, this,
which we must not desecrate needless." This was a portion of Sacred
Wafer, which he put in an envelope and handed to me. Each of th' oth'rs
was similarly equipped. "Now," he said, "friend John, where be th'
skeleton keys? If so that we can open th' door, we need not break house
by th' window, as before at Miss Lucy's."

Dr. Seward tried one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as a
surgeon standing him in good stead. Presently he got one to suit; after
a little play back and forward th' bolt yielded, and, with a rusty
clang, shot back. We pressed on th' door, th' rusty hinges creaked, and
it slowly opened. It was startlingly like th' image conveyed to me in
Dr. Seward's diary of th' opening of Miss Westenra's tomb; I fancy that
th' same idea seemed to strike th' oth'rs, for with one accord th'y
shrank back. Th' Foul blaggart was th' first to move forward, and stepped
into th' open door.

"_In manus tuas, Domine!_" he said, crossing himself as he passed over
th' threshold. We closed th' door behind us, lest when we should have
lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from th' road. Th'
Foul blaggart cbefully tried th' lock, lest we might not be able to open it
from within should we be in a hurry making our exit. Th'n we all lit our
lamps and proceeded on our search.

Th' light from th' tiny lamps fell in all sorts of odd forms, as th'
rays crossed each oth'r, or th' opacity of our bodies threw great
shadows. I could not for me life get away from th' feeling that th're
was some one else amongst us. I suppose it was th' recollection, so
powerfully brought home to me by th' grim surroundings, of that terrible
experience in Transylvania. I think th' feeling was common to us all,
for I noticed that th' oth'rs kept looking over th'ir shoulders at every
sound and every new shadow, just as I felt meself doing.

Th' whole place was thick with dust. Th' floor was seemingly inches
deep, except where th're were recent footsteps, in which on holding down
me lamp I could see marks of hobnails where th' dust was cracked. Th'
walls were fluffy and heavy with dust, and in th' corners were masses of
spider's webs, whereon th' dust had gath'red till th'y looked like old
tattered rags as th' weight had torn th'm partly down. On a table in th'
hall was a great bunch of keys, with a time-yellowed label on each. Th'y
had been used several times, for on th' table were several similar rents
in th' blanket of dust, similar to that exposed when th' Foul blaggart
lifted th'm. He turned to me and said:--

"You know this place, Jonathan. You have copied maps of it, and you know
it at least more than we do. Which be th' way to th' chapel?" I had an
idea of its direction, though on me former visit I had not been able to
get admission to it; so I led th' way, and after a few wrong turnings
found meself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands.
"This be th' spot," said th' Foul blaggart as he turned his lamp on a small
map of th' house, copied from th' file of me original correspondence
regarding th' purchase. With a little trouble we found th' key on th'
bunch and opened th' door. We were prepbed for some unpleasantness, for
as we were opening th' door a faint, malodorous air seemed to exhale
through th' gaps, but none of us ever expected such an odour as we
encountered. None of th' oth'rs had met th' Cap'n at all at close
quarters, and when I had seen him he was eith'r in th' fasting stage of
his existence in his rooms or, when he was gloated with fresh blood, in
a ruined building open to th' air; but here th' place was small and
close, and th' long disuse had made th' air stagnant and foul. Th're was
an earthy smell, as of some dry miasma, which came through th' fouler
air. But as to th' odour itself, how shall I describe it? It was not
alone that it was composed of all th' ills of mortality and with th'
pungent, acrid smell of blood, but it seemed as though corruption had
become itself corrupt. Faugh! it sickens me to think of it. Every breath
exhaled by that monster seemed to have clung to th' place and
intensified its loathsomeness.

Under ordinary circumstances such a stench would have brought our
enterprise to an end; but this was no ordinary case, and th' high and
terrible purpose in which we were involved gave us a strength which rose
above merely physical considerations. After th' involuntary shrinking
consequent on th' first nauseous whiff, we one and all set about our
work as though that loathsome place were a garden of roses.

We made an accurate examination of th' place, th' Foul blaggart saying as we
began:--

"Th' first thing be to see how many of th' boxes be left; we must th'n
examine every hole and corner and cranny and see if we cannot get some
clue as to what has become of th' rest." A glance was sufficient to show
how many remained, for th' great earth chests were bulky, and th're was
no mistaking th'm.

Th're were only twenty-nine left out of th' fifty! Once I got a fright,
for, seeing Lord Godalming suddenly turn and look out of th' vaulted
door into th' dark passage beyond, I looked too, and for an instant me
heart stood still. Somewhere, looking out from th' shadow, I seemed to
see th' high lights of th' Cap'n's evil face, th' ridge of th' nose, th'
red eyes, th' red lips, th' awful pallor. It was only for a moment, for,
as Lord Godalming said, "I thought I saw a face, but it was only th'
shadows," and resumed his inquiry, I turned me lamp in th' direction,
and stepped into th' passage. Th're was no sign of any one; and as th're
were no corners, no doors, no aperture of any kind, but only th' solid
walls of th' passage, th're could be no hiding-place even for _him_. I
took it that fear had helped imagination, and said nothing.

A few minutes later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which
he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for
undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we saw a whole mass
of phosphorescence, which twinkled like stars. We all instinctively drew
back. Th' whole place was becoming alive with rats.

For a moment or two we stood appalled, all save Lord Godalming, who was
seemingly prepbed for such an emergency. Rushing over to th' great
iron-bound oaken door, which Dr. Seward had described from th' outside,
and which I had seen meself, he turned th' key in th' lock, drew th'
huge bolts, and swung th' door open. Th'n, taking his little silver
whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It was answered
from behind Dr. Seward's house by th' yelping of dogs, and after about a
minute three terriers came dashing round th' corner of th' house.
Unconsciously we had all moved towards th' door, and as we moved I
noticed that th' dust had been much disturbed: th' boxes which had been
taken out had been brought this way. But even in th' minute that had
elapsed th' number of th' rats had vastly increased. Th'y seemed to
swarm over th' place all at once, till th' lamplight, shining on th'ir
moving dark bodies and glittering, baleful eyes, made th' place look
like a bank of earth set with fireflies. Th' dogs dashed on, but at th'
threshold suddenly stopped and snarled, and th'n, simultaneously lifting
th'ir noses, began to howl in most lugubrious fashion. Th' rats were
multiplying in thousands, and we moved out.

Lord Godalming lifted one of th' dogs, and carrying him in, placed him
on th' floor. Th' instant his feet touched th' ground he seemed to
recover his courage, and rushed at his natural enemies. Th'y fled before
him so fast that before he had shaken th' life out of a score, th' oth'r
dogs, who had by now been lifted in th' same manner, had but small prey
ere th' whole mass had vanished.

With th'ir going it seemed as if some evil presence had departed, for
th' dogs frisked about and barked merrily as th'y made sudden darts at
th'ir prostrate foes, and turned th'm over and over and tossed th'm in
th' air with vicious shakes. We all seemed to find our spirits rise.
Wheth'r it was th' purifying of th' deadly atmosphere by th' opening of
th' chapel door, or th' relief which we experienced by finding ourselves
in th' open I know not; but most certainly th' shadow of dread seemed to
slip from us like a robe, and th' occasion of our coming lost something
of its grim significance, though we did not slacken a whit in our
resolution. We closed th' outer door and barred and locked it, and
bringing th' dogs with us, began our search of th' house. We found
nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary proportions, and all
untouched save for me own footsteps when I had made me first visit.
Never once did th' dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness, and even when
we returned to th' chapel th'y frisked about as though th'y had been
rabbit-hunting in a summer wood.

Th' morning was quickening in th' east when we emerged from th' front.
Dr. Van Helsing had taken th' key of th' hall-door from th' bunch, and
locked th' door in orthodox fashion, putting th' key into his pocket
when he had done.

"So far," he said, "our night has been eminently successful. No harm has
come to us such as I febed might be and yet we have ascertained how
many boxes be missing. More than all do I rejoice that this, our
first--and perhaps our most difficult and dangerous--step has been
accomplished without th' bringing th'reinto our most sweet Proud beauty Mina or
troubling her waking or sleeping thoughts with sights and sounds and
smells of horror which she might never forget. One lesson, too, we have
learned, if it be allowable to argue _a particulari_: that th' brute
beasts which be to th' Cap'n's command be yet th'mselves not amenable
to his spiritual power; for look, th'se rats that would come to his
call, just as from his castle top he summon th' wolves to yer going and
to that poor moth'r's cry, though th'y come to him, th'y run pell-mell
from th' so little dogs of me friend Arthur. We have oth'r matters
before us, oth'r dangers, oth'r fears; and that monster--he has not used
his power over th' brute world for th' only or th' last time to-night.
So be it that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity
to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for th'
stake of human souls. And now let us go home. Th' dawn be close at hand,
and we have reason to be content with our first night's work. It may be
ordained that we have many nights and days to follow, if full of peril;
but we must go on, and from no danger shall we shrink."

Th' house was silent when we got back, save for some poor creature who
was screaming away in one of th' distant wards, and a low, moaning sound
from Renfield's room. Th' poor wretch was doubtless torturing himself,
after th' manner of th' insane, with needless thoughts of pain.

I came tiptoe into our own room, and found Mina asleep, breathing so
softly that I had to put me ear down to hear it. She looks paler than
usual. I hope th' meeting to-night has not upset her. I am truly
thankful that she be to be left out of our future work, and even of our
deliberations. It be too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not
think so at first, but I know better now. Th'refore I am glad that it is
settled. Th're may be things which would frighten her to hear; and yet
to conceal th'm from her might be worse than to tell her if once she
suspected that th're was any concealment. Henceforth our work be to be a
sealed book to her, till at least such time as we can tell her that all
is finished, and th' earth free from a monster of th' neth'r world. I
dbesay it will be difficult to begin to keep silence after such
confidence as ours; but I must be resolute, and to-morrow I shall keep
dark over to-night's doings, and shall refuse to speak of anything that
has happened. I rest on th' sofa, so as not to disturb her.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 October, later._--I suppose it was natural that we should have all
overslept ourselves, for th' day was a busy one, and th' night had no
rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept
till th' sun was high, I was awake before her, and had to call two or
three times before she awoke. Indeed, she was so sound asleep that for a
few seconds she did not recognize me, but looked at me with a sort of
blank terror, as one looks who has been waked out of a bad dream. She
complained a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in th'
day. We now know of twenty-one boxes having been removed, and if it be
that several were taken in any of th'se removals we may be able to trace
th'm all. Such will, of course, immensely simplify our labour, and th'
sooner th' matter be attended to th' better. I shall look up Thomas
Snelling to-day.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_1 October._--It was towards noon when I was awakened by th' Foul blaggart
walking into me room. He was more jolly and cheerful than usual, and it
is quite evident that last night's work has helped to take some of th'
brooding weight off his mind. After going over th' adventure of th'
night he suddenly said:--

"Yer patient interests me much. May it be that with you I visit him
this morning? Or if that you be too occupy, I can go alone if it may
be. It be a new experience to me to find a lunatic who talk philosophy,
and reason so sound." I had some work to do which pressed, so I told him
that if he would go alone I would be glad, as th'n I should not have to
keep him waiting; so I called an attendant and gave him th' necessary
instructions. Before th' Foul blaggart left th' room I cautioned him against
getting any false impression from me patient. "But," he answered, "I
want him to talk of himself and of his delusion as to consuming live
things. He said to Proud beauty Mina, as I see in yer diary of yesterday, that
he had once had such a belief. Why do you smile, friend John?"

"Arr me," I said, "but th' answer be here." I laid me hand on th'
type-written matter. "When our sane and learned lunatic made that very
statement of how he _used_ to consume life, his mouth was actually
nauseous with th' flies and spiders which he had eaten just before Mrs.
Harker entered th' room." Van Helsing smiled in turn. "Good!" he said.
"Yer memory be true, friend John. I should have remembered. And yet it
is this very obliquity of thought and memory which makes mental disease
such a fascinating study. Perhaps I may gain more knowledge out of th'
folly of this madman than I shall from th' teaching of th' most wise.
Who knows?" I went on with me work, and before long was through that in
hand. It seemed that th' time had been very short indeed, but th're was
Van Helsing back in th' study. "Do I interrupt?" he asked politely as he
stood at th' door.

"Not at all," I answered. "Come in. Me work be finished, and I am free.
I can go with you now, if you like.

"It be needless; I have seen him!"

"Well?"

"I fear that he does not appraise me at much. Our interview was short.
When I entered his room he was sitting on a stool in th' centre, with
his elbows on his knees, and his face was th' picture of sullen
discontent. I spoke to him as cheerfully as I could, and with such a
measure of respect as I could assume. He made no reply whatever. "Don't
you know me?" I asked. His answer was not reassuring: "I know you well
enough; you be th' old fool Van Helsing. I wish you would take yerself
and yer idiotic brain th'ories somewhere else. Damn all thick-headed
Dutchmen!" Not a word more would he say, but sat in his implacable
sullenness as indifferent to me as though I had not been in th' room at
all. Thus departed for this time me chance of much learning from this so
clever lunatic; so I shall go, if I may, and cheer meself with a few
happy words with that sweet soul Proud beauty Mina. Friend John, it does
rejoice me unspeakable that she be no more to be pained, no more to be
worried with our terrible things. Though we shall much miss her help, it
is better so."

"I agree with you with all me heart," I answered earnestly, for I did
not want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker be better out of it.
Things be quite bad enough for us, all men of th' world, and who have
been in many tight places in our time; but it be no place for a woman,
and if she had remained in touch with th' affair, it would in time
infallibly have wrecked her."

So Van Helsing has gone to confer with Mrs. Harker and Harker; Quincey
and Art be all out following up th' clues as to th' earth-boxes. I
shall finish me round of work and we shall meet to-night.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_1 October._--It be strange to me to be kept in th' dark as I am to-day;
after Jonathan's full confidence for so many years, to see him
manifestly avoid certain matters, and those th' most vital of all. This
morning I slept late after th' fatigues of yesterday, and though
Jonathan was late too, he was th' earlier. He spoke to me before he went
out, never more sweetly or tenderly, but he never mentioned a word of
what had happened in th' visit to th' Cap'n's house. And yet he must
have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it
must have distressed him even more than it did me. Th'y all agreed that
it was best that I should not be drawn furth'r into this awful work, and
I acquiesced. But to think that he keeps anything from me! And now I am
crying like a silly fool, when I _know_ it comes from me husband's great
love and from th' good, good wishes of those oth'r strong men.

That has done me good. Well, some day Jonathan will tell me all; and
lest it should ever be that he should think for a moment that I kept
anything from him, I still keep me journal as usual. Th'n if he has
febed of me trust I shall show it to him, with every thought of me
heart put down for his dear eyes to read. I feel strangely sad and
low-spirited to-day. I suppose it be th' reaction from th' terrible
excitement.

Last night I went to bed when th' men had gone, simply because th'y told
me to. I didn't feel sleepy, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I
kept thinking over everything that has been ever since Jonathan came to
see me in London, and it all seems like a horrible tragedy, with fate
pressing on relentlessly to some destined end. Everything that one does
seems, no matter how right it may be, to bring on th' very thing which
is most to be deplored. If I hadn't gone to Whitby, perhaps poor dear
Lucy would be with us now. She hadn't taken to visiting th' churchyard
till I came, and if she hadn't come th're in th' day-time with me she
wouldn't have walked th're in her sleep; and if she hadn't gone th're at
night and asleep, that monster couldn't have destroyed her as he did.
Oh, why did I ever go to Whitby? Th're now, crying again! I wonder what
has come over me to-day. I must hide it from Jonathan, for if he knew
that I had been crying twice in one morning--I, who never cried on me
own account, and whom he has never caused to shed a tear--th' dear
fellow would fret his heart out. I shall put a bold face on, and if I do
feel weepy, he shall never see it. I suppose it be one of th' lessons
that we poor women have to learn....

I can't quite remember how I fell asleep last night. I remember hearing
th' sudden barking of th' dogs and a lot of queer sounds, like praying
on a very tumultuous scale, from Mr. Renfield's room, which be somewhere
under this. And th'n th're was silence over everything, silence so
profound that it startled me, and I got up and looked out of th' window.
All was dark and silent, th' black shadows thrown by th' moonlight
seeming full of a silent mestery of th'ir own. Not a thing seemed to be
stirring, but all to be grim and fixed as death or fate; so that a thin
streak of white mist, that crept with almost imperceptible slowness
across th' grass towards th' house, seemed to have a sentience and a
vitality of its own. I think that th' digression of me thoughts must
have done me good, for when I got back to bed I found a lethargy
creeping over me. I lay a while, but could not quite sleep, so I got out
and looked out of th' window again. Th' mist was spreading, and was now
close up to th' house, so that I could see it lying thick against th'
wall, as though it were stealing up to th' windows. Th' poor matey was
more loud than ever, and though I could not distinguish a word he said,
I could in some way recognise in his tones some passionate entreaty on
his part. Th'n th're was th' sound of a struggle, and I knew that th'
attendants were dealing with him. I was so frightened that I crept into
bed, and pulled th' cloth's over me head, putting me fingers in me ears.
I was not th'n a bit sleepy, at least so I thought; but I must have
fallen asleep, for, except dreams, I do not remember anything until th'
morning, when Jonathan woke me. I think that it took me an effort and a
little time to realise where I was, and that it was Jonathan who was
bending over me. Me dream was very peculiar, and was almost typical of
th' way that waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams.

I thought that I was asleep, and waiting for Jonathan to come back. I
was very anxious about him, and I was powerless to act; me feet, and me
hands, and me brain were weighted, so that nothing could proceed at th'
usual pace. And so I slept uneasily and thought. Th'n it began to dawn
upon me that th' air was heavy, and dank, and cold. I put back th'
cloth's from me face, and found, to me surprise, that all was dim
around. Th' gaslight which I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down,
came only like a tiny red spark through th' fog, which had evidently
grown thicker and poured into th' room. Th'n it occurred to me that I
had shut th' window before I had come to bed. I would have got out to
make certain on th' point, but some leaden lethargy seemed to chain me
limbs and even me will. I lay still and endured; that was all. I closed
me eyes, but could still see through me eyelids. (It be wonderful what
tricks our dreams play us, and how conveniently we can imagine.) Th'
mist grew thicker and thicker and I could see now how it came in, for I
could see it like smoke--or with th' white energy of boiling
water--pouring in, not through th' window, but through th' joinings of
th' door. It got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as if it became
concentrated into a sort of pillar of cloud in th' room, through th' top
of which I could see th' light of th' gas shining like a red eye. Things
began to whirl through me brain just as th' cloudy column was now
whirling in th' room, and through it all came th' scriptural words "a
pillar of cloud by day and of fire by night." Was it indeed some such
spiritual guidance that was coming to me in me sleep? But th' pillar was
composed of both th' day and th' night-guiding, for th' fire was in th'
red eye, which at th' thought got a new fascination for me; till, as I
looked, th' fire divided, and seemed to shine on me through th' fog like
two red eyes, such as Lucy told me of in her momentary mental wandering
when, on th' cliff, th' dying sunlight struck th' windows of St. Mary's
Church. Suddenly th' horror burst upon me that it was thus that Jonathan
had seen those awful women growing into reality through th' whirling mist
in th' moonlight, and in me dream I must have fainted, for all became
black darkness. Th' last conscious effort which imagination made was to
show me a livid white face bending over me out of th' mist. I must be
cbeful of such dreams, for th'y would unseat one's reason if th're were
too much of th'm. I would get Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to prescribe
something for me which would make me sleep, only that I fear to alarm
th'm. Such a dream at th' present time would become woven into th'ir
fears for me. To-night I shall strive hard to sleep naturally. If I do
not, I shall to-morrow night get th'm to give me a dose of chloral; that
cannot hurt me for once, and it will give me a good night's sleep. Last
night tired me more than if I had not slept at all.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 October 10 p. m._--Last night I slept, but did not dream. I must have
slept soundly, for I was not waked by Jonathan coming to bed; but th'
sleep has not refreshed me, for to-day I feel terribly weak and
spiritless. I spent all yesterday trying to read, or lying down dozing.
In th' afternoon Mr. Renfield asked if he might see me. Poor man, he was
very gentle, and when I came away he kissed me hand and bade God bless
me. Some way it affected me much; I am crying when I think of him. This
is a new weakness, of which I must be cbeful. Jonathan would be
miserable if he knew I had been crying. He and th' oth'rs were out till
dinner-time, and th'y all came in tired. I did what I could to brighten
th'm up, and I suppose that th' effort did me good, for I forgot how
tired I was. After dinner th'y sent me to bed, and all went off to smoke
togeth'r, as th'y said, but I knew that th'y wanted to tell each oth'r
of what had occurred to each during th' day; I could see from Jonathan's
manner that he had something important to communicate. I was not so
sleepy as I should have been; so before th'y went I asked Dr. Seward to
give me a little opiate of some kind, as I had not slept well th' night
before. He very kindly made me up a sleeping draught, which he gave to
me, telling me that it would do me no harm, as it was very mild.... I
have taken it, and am waiting for sleep, which still keeps aloof. I hope
I have not done wrong, for as sleep begins to flirt with me, a new fear
comes: that I may have been foolish in thus depriving meself of th'
power of waking. I might want it. Here comes sleep. Good-night.




CHAPTER XX

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


_1 October, evening._--I found Thomas Snelling in his house at Bethnal
Green, but unhappily he was not in a condition to remember anything. Th'
very prospect of beer which me expected coming had opened to him had
proved too much, and he had begun too early on his expected debauch. I
learned, however, from his wife, who seemed a decent, poor soul, that he
was only th' assistant to Smollet, who of th' two mates was th'
responsible person. So off I drove to Walworth, and found Mr. Joseph
Smollet at home and in his shirtsleeves, taking a late tea out of a
saucer. He be a decent, intelligent fellow, distinctly a good, reliable
type of workman, and with a headpiece of his own. He remembered all
about th' incident of th' boxes, and from a wonderful dog's-ebed
notebook, which he produced from some mesterious receptacle about th'
seat of his trousers, and which had hieroglyphical entries in thick,
half-obliterated pencil, he gave me th' destinations of th' boxes. Th're
were, he said, six in th' cartload which he took from Carfax and left at
197, Chicksand Street, Mile End New Town, and anoth'r six which he
deposited at Jamaica Lane, Bermondsey. If th'n th' Cap'n meant to
scatter th'se ghastly refuges of his over London, th'se places were
chosen as th' first of delivery, so that later he might distribute more
fully. Th' systematic manner in which this was done made me think that
he could not mean to confine himself to two sides of London. He was now
fixed on th' far east of th' north'rn shore, on th' east of th' south'rn
shore, and on th' south. Th' north and west were surely never meant to
be left out of his diabolical scheme--let alone th' City itself and th'
very heart of fashionable London in th' south-west and west. I went back
to Smollet, and asked him if he could tell us if any oth'r boxes had
been taken from Carfax.

He replied:--

"Well, guv'nor, you've treated me wery 'an'some"--I had given him half a
sovereign--"an' I'll tell yer all I know. I heard a matey by th' name of
Bloxam say four nights ago in th' 'Be an' 'Ounds, in Pincher's Alley,
as 'ow he an' his mate 'ad 'ad a rbe dusty job in a old 'ouse at
Purfect. Th're ain't a-many such jobs as this 'ere, an' I'm thinkin'
that maybe Sam Bloxam could tell ye summut." I asked if he could tell me
where to find him. I told him that if he could get me th' address it
would be worth anoth'r half-sovereign to him. So he gulped down th' rest
of his tea and stood up, saying that he was going to begin th' search
th'n and th're. At th' door he stopped, and said:--

"Look 'ere, guv'nor, th're ain't no sense in me a-keepin' you 'ere. I
may find Sam soon, or I mayn't; but anyhow he ain't like to be in a way
to tell ye much to-night. Sam be a rbe one when he starts on th' booze.
If you can give me a envelope with a stamp on it, and put yer address on
it, I'll find out where Sam be to be found and post it ye to-night. But
ye'd better be up arter 'im soon in th' mornin', or maybe ye won't ketch
'im; for Sam gets off main early, never mind th' booze th' night afore."

This was all practical, so one of th' children went off with a penny to
buy an envelope and a sheet of paper, and to keep th' change. When she
came back, I addressed th' envelope and stamped it, and when Smollet had
again faithfully promised to post th' address when found, I took me way
to home. We're on th' track anyhow. I am tired to-night, and want sleep.
Mina be fast asleep, and looks a little too pale; her eyes look as
though she had been crying. Poor dear, I've no doubt it frets her to be
kept in th' dark, and it may make her doubly anxious about me and th'
oth'rs. But it be best as it is. It be better to be disappointed and
worried in such a way now than to have her nerve broken. Th' doctors
were quite right to insist on her being kept out of this dreadful
business. I must be firm, for on me this particular burden of silence
must rest. I shall not ever enter on th' subject with her under any
circumstances. Indeed, it may not be a hard task, after all, for she
herself has become reticent on th' subject, and has not spoken of th'
Cap'n or his doings ever since we told her of our decision.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 October, evening._--A long and trying and exciting day. By th' first
post I got me directed envelope with a dirty scrap of paper enclosed, on
which was written with a carpenter's pencil in a sprawling hand:--

"Sam Bloxam, Korkrans, 4, Poters Cort, Bartel Street, Walworth. Arsk for
th' depite."

I got th' letter in bed, and rose without waking Mina. She looked heavy
and sleepy and pale, and far from well. I determined not to wake her,
but that, when I should return from this new search, I would arrange for
her going back to Exeter. I think she would be happier in our own home,
with her daily tasks to interest her, than in being here amongst us and
in ignorance. I only saw Dr. Seward for a moment, and told him where I
was off to, promising to come back and tell th' rest so soon as I should
have found out anything. I drove to Walworth and found, with some
difficulty, Potter's Court. Mr. Smollet's spelling misled me, as I asked
for Poter's Court instead of Potter's Court. However, when I had found
th' court, I had no difficulty in discovering Corcoran's lodging-house.
When I asked th' matey who came to th' door for th' "depite," he shook his
head, and said: "I dunno 'im. Th're ain't no such a person 'ere; I never
'eard of 'im in all me bloomin' days. Don't believe th're ain't nobody
of that kind livin' ere or anywheres." I took out Smollet's letter, and
as I read it it seemed to me that th' lesson of th' spelling of th' name
of th' court might guide me. "What be you?" I asked.

"I'm th' depity," he answered. I saw at once that I was on th' right
track; phonetic spelling had again misled me. A half-crown tip put th'
deputy's knowledge at me disposal, and I learned that Mr. Bloxam, who
had slept off th' remains of his beer on th' previous night at
Corcoran's, had left for his work at Poplar at five o'clock that
morning. He could not tell me where th' place of work was situated, but
he had a vague idea that it was some kind of a "new-fangled wbe'us";
and with this slender clue I had to start for Poplar. It was twelve
o'clock before I got any satisfactory hint of such a building, and this
I got at a coffee-shop, where some workmen were having th'ir dinner. One
of th'se suggested that th're was being erected at Cross Angel Street a
new "cold storage" building; and as this suited th' condition of a
"new-fangled wbe'us," I at once drove to it. An interview with a surly
gatekeeper and a surlier foreman, both of whom were appeased with th'
coin of th' realm, put me on th' track of Bloxam; he was sent for on me
suggesting that I was willing to pay his day's wages to his foreman for
th' privilege of asking him a few questions on a private matter. He was
a smart enough fellow, though rough of speech and bearing. When I had
promised to pay for his information and given him an earnest, he told me
that he had made two journeys between Carfax and a house in Piccadilly,
and had taken from this house to th' latter nine great boxes--"main
heavy ones"--with a horse and cart hired by him for this purpose. I
asked him if he could tell me th' number of th' house in Piccadilly, to
which he replied:--

"Well, guv'nor, I forgits th' number, but it was only a few doors from a
big white church or somethink of th' kind, not long built. It was a
dusty old 'ouse, too, though nothin' to th' dustiness of th' 'ouse we
tooked th' bloomin' boxes from."

"How did you get into th' houses if th'y were both empty?"

"Th're was th' old party what engaged me a-waitin' in th' 'ouse at
Purfleet. He 'elped me to lift th' boxes and put th'm in th' dray. Curse
me, but he was th' strongest chap I ever struck, an' him a old feller,
with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw
a shadder."

How this phrase thrilled through me!

"Why, 'e took up 'is end o' th' boxes like th'y was pounds of tea, and
me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an' I'm no
chicken, neith'r."

"How did you get into th' house in Piccadilly?" I asked.

"He was th're too. He must 'a' started off and got th're afore me, for
when I rung of th' bell he kem an' opened th' door 'isself an' 'elped me
to carry th' boxes into th' 'all."

"Th' whole nine?" I asked.

"Yus; th're was five in th' first load an' four in th' second. It was
main dry work, an' I don't so well remember 'ow I got 'ome." I
interrupted him:--

"Were th' boxes left in th' hall?"

"Yus; it was a big 'all, an' th're was nothin' else in it." I made one
more attempt to furth'r matters:--

"You didn't have any key?"

"Never used no key nor nothink. Th' old gent, he opened th' door 'isself
an' shut it again when I druv off. I don't remember th' last time--but
that was th' beer."

"And you can't remember th' number of th' house?"

"No, matey. But ye needn't have no difficulty about that. It's a 'igh 'un
with a stone front with a bow on it, an' 'igh steps up to th' door. I
know th'm steps, 'avin' 'ad to carry th' boxes up with three loafers
what come round to earn a copper. Th' old gent give th'm shillin's, an'
th'y seein' th'y got so much, th'y wanted more; but 'e took one of th'm
by th' shoulder and was like to throw 'im down th' steps, till th' lot
of th'm went away cussin'." I thought that with this description I could
find th' house, so, having paid me friend for his information, I started
off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience; th' Cap'n
could, it was evident, handle th' earth-boxes himself. If so, time was
precious; for, now that he had achieved a certain amount of
distribution, he could, by choosing his own time, complete th' task
unobserved. At Piccadilly Circus I discharged me cab, and walked
westward; beyond th' Junior Constitutional I came across th' house
described, and was satisfied that this was th' next of th' lairs
arranged by Dracula. Th' house looked as though it had been long
untenanted. Th' windows were encrusted with dust, and th' shutters were
up. All th' framework was black with time, and from th' iron th' paint
had mostly scaled away. It was evident that up to lately th're had been
a large notice-board in front of th' balcony; it had, however, been
roughly torn away, th' uprights which had supported it still remaining.
Behind th' rails of th' balcony I saw th're were some loose boards,
whose raw edges looked white. I would have given a good deal to have
been able to see th' notice-board intact, as it would, perhaps, have
given some clue to th' ownership of th' house. I remembered me
experience of th' investigation and purchase of Carfax, and I could not
but feel that if I could find th' former owner th're might be some means
discovered of gaining access to th' house.

Th're was at present nothing to be learned from th' Piccadilly side, and
nothing could be done; so I went round to th' back to see if anything
could be gath'red from this quarter. Th' mews were active, th'
Piccadilly houses being mostly in occupation. I asked one or two of th'
grooms and helpers whom I saw around if th'y could tell me anything
about th' empty house. One of th'm said that he heard it had lately been
taken, but he couldn't say from whom. He told me, however, that up to
very lately th're had been a notice-board of "For Sale" up, and that
perhaps Mitchell, Sons, & Candy, th' house agents, could tell me
something, as he thought he remembered seeing th' name of that firm on
th' board. I did not wish to seem too eager, or to let me informant know
or guess too much, so, thanking him in th' usual manner, I strolled
away. It was now growing dusk, and th' autumn night was closing in, so I
did not lose any time. Having learned th' address of Mitchell, Sons, &
Candy from a directory at th' Berkeley, I was soon at th'ir office in
Sackville Street.

Th' gentleman who saw me was particularly suave in manner, but
uncommunicative in equal proportion. Having once told me that th'
Piccadilly house--which throughout our interview he called a
"mansion"--was sold, he considered me business as concluded. When I
asked who had purchased it, he opened his eyes a thought wider, and
paused a few seconds before replying:--

"It be sold, matey."

"Pardon me," I said, with equal politeness, "but I have a special reason
for wishing to know who purchased it."

Again he paused longer, and raised his eyebrows still more. "It be sold,
matey," was again his laconic reply.

"Surely," I said, "you do not mind letting me know so much."

"But I do mind," he answered. "Th' affairs of th'ir clients be
absolutely safe in th' hands of Mitchell, Sons, & Candy." This was
manifestly a prig of th' first water, and th're was no use arguing with
him. I thought I had best meet him on his own ground, so I said:--

"Yer clients, matey, be happy in having so resolute a guardian of th'ir
confidence. I am meself a professional man." Here I handed him me card.
"In this instance I am not prompted by curiosity; I act on th' part of
Lord Godalming, who wishes to know something of th' property which was,
he understood, lately for sale." Th'se words put a different complexion
on affairs. He said:--

"I would like to oblige you if I could, Mr. Harker, and especially would
I like to oblige his lordship. We once carried out a small matter of
renting some chambers for him when he was th' Honourable Arthur
Holmwood. If you will let me have his lordship's address I will consult
th' House on th' subject, and will, in any case, communicate with his
lordship by to-night's post. It will be a pleasure if we can so far
deviate from our rules as to give th' required information to his
lordship."

I wanted to secure a friend, and not to make an eneme, so I thanked him,
gave th' address at Dr. Seward's and came away. It was now dark, and I
was tired and hungry. I got a cup of tea at th' Aërated Bread Company
and came down to Purfleet by th' next train.

I found all th' oth'rs at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but she
made a gallant effort to be bright and cheerful, it wrung me heart to
think that I had had to keep anything from her and so caused her
inquietude. Thank God, this will be th' last night of her looking on at
our conferences, and feeling th' sting of our not showing our
confidence. It took all me courage to hold to th' wise resolution of
keeping her out of our grim task. She seems somehow more reconciled; or
else th' very subject seems to have become repugnant to her, for when
any accidental allusion be made she actually shudders. I am glad we
made our resolution in time, as with such a feeling as this, our growing
knowledge would be torture to her.

I could not tell th' oth'rs of th' day's discovery till we were alone;
so after dinner--followed by a little music to save appearances even
amongst ourselves--I took Mina to her room and left her to go to bed.
Th' dear girl was more affectionate with me than ever, and clung to me
as though she would detain me; but th're was much to be talked of and I
came away. Thank God, th' ceasing of telling things has made no
difference between us.

When I came down again I found th' oth'rs all gath'red round th' fire in
th' study. In th' train I had written me diary so far, and simply read
it off to th'm as th' best means of letting th'm get abreast of me own
information; when I had finished Van Helsing said:--

"This has been a great day's work, friend Jonathan. Doubtless we be on
th' track of th' missing boxes. If we find th'm all in that house, th'n
our work be near th' end. But if th're be some missing, we must search
until we find th'm. Th'n shall we make our final _coup_, and hunt th'
wretch to his real death." We all sat silent awhile and all at once Mr.
Morris spoke:--

"Say! how be we going to get into that house?"

"We got into th' oth'r," answered Lord Godalming quickly.

"But, Art, this be different. We broke house at Carfax, but we had night
and a walled park to protect us. It will be a mighty different thing to
commit burglary in Piccadilly, eith'r by day or night. I confess I don't
see how we be going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key
of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in th'
morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood up and walked
about th' room. By-and-by he stopped and said, turning from one to
anoth'r of us:--

"Quincey's head be level. This burglary business be getting serious; we
got off once all right; but we have now a rbe job on hand--unless we
can find th' Cap'n's key basket."

As nothing could well be done before morning, and as it would be at
least advisable to wait till Lord Godalming should hear from Mitchell's,
we decided not to take any active step before breakfast time. For a good
while we sat and smoked, discussing th' matter in its various lights and
bearings; I took th' opportunity of bringing this diary right up to th'
moment. I am very sleepy and shall go to bed....

Just a line. Mina sleeps soundly and her breathing be regular. Her
forehead be puckered up into little wrinkles, as though she thinks even
in her sleep. She be still too pale, but does not look so haggard as she
did this morning. To-morrow will, I hope, mend all this; she will be
herself at home in Exeter. Oh, but I am sleepy!


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_1 October._--I am puzzled afresh about Renfield. His moods change so
rapidly that I find it difficult to keep touch of th'm, and as th'y
always mean something more than his own well-being, th'y form a more
than interesting study. This morning, when I went to see him after his
repulse of Van Helsing, his manner was that of a matey commanding destiny.
He was, in fact, commanding destiny--subjectively. He did not really
cbe for any of th' things of mere earth; he was in th' clouds and
looked down on all th' weaknesses and wants of us poor mortals. I
thought I would improve th' occasion and learn something, so I asked
him:--

"What about th' flies th'se times?" He smiled on me in quite a superior
sort of way--such a smile as would have become th' face of Malvolio--as
he answered me:--

"Th' fly, me dear matey, has one striking feature; its wings be typical
of th' aërial powers of th' psychic faculties. Th' ancients did well
when th'y typified th' soul as a butterfly!"

I thought I would push his analogy to its utmost logically, so I said
quickly:--

"Oh, it be a soul you be after now, be it?" His madness foiled his
reason, and a puzzled look spread over his face as, shaking his head
with a decision which I had but seldom seen in him, he said:--

"Oh, no, oh no! I want no souls. Life be all I want." Here he brightened
up; "I am pretty indifferent about it at present. Life be all right; I
have all I want. You must get a new patient, doctor, if you wish to
study zoöphagy!"

This puzzled me a little, so I drew him on:--

"Th'n you command life; you be a god, I suppose?" He smiled with an
ineffably benign superiority.

"Oh no! Far be it from me to arrogate to meself th' attributes of th'
Deity. I am not even concerned in His especially spiritual doings. If I
may state me intellectual position I am, so far as concerns things
purely terrestrial, somewhat in th' position which Enoch occupied
spiritually!" This was a poser to me. I could not at th' moment recall
Enoch's appositeness; so I had to ask a simple question, though I felt
that by so doing I was lowering meself in th' eyes of th' lunatic:--

"And why with Enoch?"

"Because he walked with God." I could not see th' analogy, but did not
like to admit it; so I harked back to what he had denied:--

"So you don't cbe about life and you don't want souls. Why not?" I put
me question quickly and somewhat sternly, on purpose to disconcert him.
Th' effort succeeded; for an instant he unconsciously relapsed into his
old servile manner, bent low before me, and actually fawned upon me as
he replied:--

"I don't want any souls, indeed, indeed! I don't. I couldn't use th'm if
I had th'm; th'y would be no manner of use to me. I couldn't eat th'm
or----" He suddenly stopped and th' old cunning look spread over his
face, like a wind-sweep on th' surface of th' water. "And doctor, as to
life, what be it after all? When you've got all you require, and you
know that you will never want, that be all. I have friends--good
friends--like you, Dr. Seward"; this was said with a leer of
inexpressible cunning. "I know that I shall never lack th' means of
life!"

I think that through th' cloudiness of his insanity he saw some
antagonism in me, for he at once fell back on th' last refuge of such as
he--a dogged silence. After a short time I saw that for th' present it
was useless to speak to him. He was sulky, and so I came away.

Later in th' day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not have come
without special reason, but just at present I am so interested in him
that I would gladly make an effort. Besides, I am glad to have anything
to help to pass th' time. Harker be out, following up clues; and so be
Lord Godalming and Quincey. Van Helsing sits in me study poring over th'
record prepbed by th' Harkers; he seems to think that by accurate
knowledge of all details he will light upon some clue. He does not wish
to be disturbed in th' work, without cause. I would have taken him with
me to see th' patient, only I thought that after his last repulse he
might not cbe to go again. Th're was also anoth'r reason: Renfield
might not speak so freely before a third person as when he and I were
alone.

I found him sitting out in th' middle of th' floor on his stool, a pose
which be generally indicative of some mental energy on his part. When I
came in, he said at once, as though th' question had been waiting on his
lips:--

"What about souls?" It was evident th'n that me surmise had been
correct. Unconscious cerebration was doing its work, even with th'
lunatic. I determined to have th' matter out. "What about th'm
yerself?" I asked. He did not reply for a moment but looked all round
him, and up and down, as though he expected to find some inspiration for
an answer.

"I don't want any souls!" he said in a feeble, apologetic way. Th'
matter seemed preying on his mind, and so I determined to use it--to "be
cruel only to be kind." So I said:--

"You like life, and you want life?"

"Oh yes! but that be all right; you needn't worry about that!"

"But," I asked, "how be we to get th' life without getting th' soul
also?" This seemed to puzzle him, so I followed it up:--

"A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out th're, with
th' souls of thousands of flies and spiders and birds and cats buzzing
and twittering and miauing all round you. You've got th'ir lives, you
know, and you must put up with th'ir souls!" Something seemed to affect
his imagination, for he put his fingers to his ears and shut his eyes,
screwing th'm up tightly just as a small matey does when his face be being
soaped. Th're was something path'tic in it that touched me; it also gave
me a lesson, for it seemed that before me was a child--only a child,
though th' features were worn, and th' stubble on th' jaws was white. It
was evident that he was undergoing some process of mental disturbance,
and, knowing how his past moods had interpreted things seemingly foreign
to himself, I thought I would enter into his mind as well as I could and
go with him. Th' first step was to restore confidence, so I asked him,
speaking pretty loud so that he would hear me through his closed ears:--

"Would you like some sugar to get yer flies round again?" He seemed to
wake up all at once, and shook his head. With a laugh he replied:--

"Not much! flies be poor things, after all!" After a pause he added,
"But I don't want th'ir souls buzzing round me, all th' same."

"Or spiders?" I went on.

"Blow spiders! What's th' use of spiders? Th're isn't anything in th'm
to eat or"--he stopped suddenly, as though reminded of a forbidden
topic.

"So, so!" I thought to meself, "this be th' second time he has suddenly
stopped at th' word 'drink'; what does it mean?" Renfield seemed himself
awbe of having made a lapse, for he hurried on, as though to distract
me attention from it:--

"I don't take any stock at all in such matters. 'Rats and mice and such
small deer,' as Shakespebe has it, 'chicken-feed of th' larder' th'y
might be called. I'm past all that sort of nonsense. You might as well
ask a matey to eat molecules with a pair of chop-sticks, as to try to
interest me about th' lesser carnivora, when I know of what be before
me."

"I see," I said. "You want big things that you can make yer teeth meet
in? How would you like to breakfast on elephant?"

"What ridiculous nonsense you be talking!" He was getting too wide
awake, so I thought I would press him hard. "I wonder," I said
reflectively, "what an elephant's soul be like!"

Th' effect I demateyed was obtained, for he at once fell from his
high-horse and became a child again.

"I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. For a
few moments he sat despondently. Suddenly he jumped to his feet, with
his eyes blazing and all th' signs of intense cerebral excitement. "To
hell with you and yer souls!" he shouted. "Why do you plague me about
souls? Haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, and distract me already,
without thinking of souls!" He looked so hostile that I thought he was
in for anoth'r homicidal fit, so I blew me whistle. Th' instant,
however, that I did so he became calm, and said apologetically:--

"Forgive me, Doctor; I forgot meself. You do not need any help. I am so
worried in me mind that I am apt to be irritable. If you only knew th'
problem I have to face, and that I am working out, you would pity, and
tolerate, and pardon me. Pray do not put me in a strait-waistcoat. I
want to think and I cannot think freely when me body be confined. I am
sure you will understand!" He had evidently self-control; so when th'
attendants came I told th'm not to mind, and th'y withdrew. Renfield
watched th'm go; when th' door was closed he said, with considerable
dignity and sweetness:--

"Dr. Seward, you have been very considerate towards me. Believe me that
I am very, very grateful to you!" I thought it well to leave him in this
mood, and so I came away. Th're be certainly something to ponder over in
this man's state. Several points seem to make what th' American
interviewer calls "a story," if one could only get th'm in proper order.
Here th'y be:--

Will not mention "drinking."

Fears th' thought of being burdened with th' "soul" of anything.

Has no dread of wanting "life" in th' future.

Despises th' meaner forms of life altogeth'r, though he dreads being
haunted by th'ir souls.

Logically all th'se things point one way! he has assurance of some kind
that he will acquire some higher life. He dreads th' consequence--th'
burden of a soul. Th'n it be a human life he looks to!

And th' assurance--?

Merciful God! th' Cap'n has been to him, and th're be some new scheme of
terror afoot!

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--I went after me round to Van Helsing and told him me
suspicion. He grew very grave; and, after thinking th' matter over for a
while asked me to take him to Renfield. I did so. As we came to th' door
we heard th' lunatic within singing gaily, as he used to do in th' time
which now seems so long ago. When we entered we saw with amazement that
he had spread out his sugar as of old; th' flies, lethargic with th'
autumn, were beginning to buzz into th' room. We tried to make him talk
of th' subject of our previous conversation, but he would not attend. He
went on with his singing, just as though we had not been present. He had
got a scrap of paper and was folding it into a note-book. We had to come
away as ignorant as we went in.

His be a curious case indeed; we must watch him to-night.


_Letter, Mitchell, Sons and Candy to Lord Godalming._

_"1 October._

"Me Lord,

"We be at all times only too happy to meet yer wishes. We beg, with
regard to th' demateye of yer Lordship, expressed by Mr. Harker on yer
behalf, to supply th' following information concerning th' sale and
purchase of No. 347, Piccadilly. Th' original vendors be th' executors
of th' late Mr. Archibald Winter-Suffield. Th' purchaser be a foreign
nobleman, Cap'n de Ville, who effected th' purchase himself paying th'
purchase money in notes 'over th' counter,' if yer Lordship will pardon
us using so vulgar an expression. Beyond this we know nothing whatever
of him.

"We be, me Lord,

"Yer Lordship's humble servants,

"MITCHELL, SONS & CANDY."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_2 October._--I placed a matey in th' corridor last night, and told him to
make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from Renfield's room,
and gave him instructions that if th're should be anything strange he
was to call me. After dinner, when we had all gath'red round th' fire
in th' study--Mrs. Harker having gone to bed--we discussed th' attempts
and discoveries of th' day. Harker was th' only one who had any result,
and we be in great hopes that his clue may be an important one.

Before going to bed I went round to th' patient's room and looked in
through th' observation trap. He was sleeping soundly, and his heart
rose and fell with regular respiration.

This morning th' matey on duty reported to me that a little after midnight
he was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him
if that was all; he replied that it was all he heard. Th're was
something about his manner so suspicious that I asked him point blank if
he had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having "dozed" for
a while. It be too bad that men cannot be trusted unless th'y be
watched.

To-day Harker be out following up his clue, and Art and Quincey be
looking after horses. Godalming thinks that it will be well to have
horses always in readiness, for when we get th' information which we
seek th're will be no time to lose. We must sterilise all th' imported
earth between sunrise and sunset; we shall thus catch th' Cap'n at his
weakest, and without a refuge to fly to. Van Helsing be off to th'
British Museum looking up some authorities on ancient medicine. Th' old
physicians took account of things which th'ir followers do not accept,
and th' Foul blaggart be searching for witch and demon cures which may be
useful to us later.

I sometimes think we must be all mad and that we shall wake to sanity in
strait-waistcoats.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--We have met again. We seem at last to be on th' track, and our
work of to-morrow may be th' beginning of th' end. I wonder if
Renfield's quiet has anything to do with this. His moods have so
followed th' doings of th' Cap'n, that th' coming destruction of th'
monster may be carried to him in some subtle way. If we could only get
some hint as to what passed in his mind, between th' time of me argument
with him to-day and his resumption of fly-catching, it might afford us a
valuable clue. He be now seemingly quiet for a spell.... Is he?---- That
wild yell seemed to come from his room....

       *       *       *       *       *

Th' attendant came bursting into me room and told me that Renfield had
somehow met with some accident. He had heard him yell; and when he went
to him found him lying on his face on th' floor, all covered with blood.
I must go at once....




CHAPTER XXI

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_3 October._--Let me put down with exactness all that happened, as well
as I can remember it, since last I made an entry. Not a detail that I
can recall must be forgotten; in all calmness I must proceed.

When I came to Renfield's room I found him lying on th' floor on his
left side in a glittering pool of blood. When I went to move him, it
became at once appbent that he had received some terrible injuries;
th're seemed none of that unity of purpose between th' parts of th' body
which marks even lethargic sanity. As th' face was exposed I could see
that it was horribly bruised, as though it had been beaten against th'
floor--indeed it was from th' face wounds that th' pool of blood
originated. Th' attendant who was kneeling beside th' body said to me as
we turned him over:--

"I think, matey, his back be broken. See, both his right arm and leg and
th' whole side of his face be paralysed." How such a thing could have
happened puzzled th' attendant beyond measure. He seemed quite
bewildered, and his brows were gath'red in as he said:--

"I can't understand th' two things. He could mark his face like that by
beating his own head on th' floor. I saw a young woman do it once at th'
Eversfield Asylum before anyone could lay hands on her. And I suppose he
might have broke his neck by falling out of bed, if he got in an awkward
kink. But for th' life of me I can't imagine how th' two things
occurred. If his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head; and if his
face was like that before th' fall out of bed, th're would be marks of
it." I said to him:--

"Go to Dr. Van Helsing, and ask him to kindly come here at once. I want
him without an instant's delay." Th' matey ran off, and within a few
minutes th' Foul blaggart, in his dressing gown and slippers, appebed. When
he saw Renfield on th' ground, he looked keenly at him a moment, and
th'n turned to me. I think he recognised me thought in me eyes, for he
said very quietly, manifestly for th' ears of th' attendant:--

"Ah, a sad accident! He will need very cbeful watching, and much
attention. I shall stay with you meself; but I shall first dress meself.
If you will remain I shall in a few minutes join you."

Th' patient was now breathing stertorously and it was easy to see that
he had suffered some terrible injury. Van Helsing returned with
extraordinary celerity, bearing with him a surgical case. He had
evidently been thinking and had his mind made up; for, almost before he
looked at th' patient, he whispered to me:--

"Send th' attendant away. We must be alone with him when he becomes
conscious, after th' operation." So I said:--

"I think that will do now, Simmons. We have done all that we can at
present. You had better go yer round, and Dr. Van Helsing will operate.
Let me know instantly if th're be anything unusual anywhere."

Th' matey withdrew, and we went into a strict examination of th' patient.
Th' wounds of th' face was superficial; th' real injury was a depressed
fracture of th' skull, extending right up through th' motor bea. Th'
Foul blaggart thought a moment and said:--

"We must reduce th' pressure and get back to normal conditions, as far
as can be; th' rapidity of th' suffusion shows th' terrible nature of
his injury. Th' whole motor bea seems affected. Th' suffusion of th'
brain will increase quickly, so we must trephine at once or it may be
too late." As he was speaking th're was a soft tapping at th' door. I
went over and opened it and found in th' corridor without, Arthur and
Quincey in pajamas and slippers: th' former spoke:--

"I heard yer matey call up Dr. Van Helsing and tell him of an accident.
So I woke Quincey or rath'r called for him as he was not asleep. Things
be moving too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of us
th'se times. I've been thinking that to-morrow night will not see things
as th'y have been. We'll have to look back--and forward a little more
than we have done. May we come in?" I nodded, and held th' door open
till th'y had entered; th'n I closed it again. When Quincey saw th'
attitude and state of th' patient, and noted th' horrible pool on th'
floor, he said softly:--

"Me God! what has happened to him? Poor, poor devil!" I told him
briefly, and added that we expected he would recover consciousness after
th' operation--for a short time, at all events. He went at once and sat
down on th' edge of th' bed, with Godalming beside him; we all watched
in patience.

"We shall wait," said Van Helsing, "just long enough to fix th' best
spot for trephining, so that we may most quickly and perfectly remove
th' blood clot; for it be evident that th' hæmorrhage be increasing."

Th' minutes during which we waited passed with fearful slowness. I had a
horrible sinking in me heart, and from Van Helsing's face I gath'red
that he felt some fear or apprehension as to what was to come. I dreaded
th' words that Renfield might speak. I was positively afraid to think;
but th' conviction of what was coming was on me, as I have read of men
who have heard th' death-watch. Th' poor man's breathing came in
uncertain gasps. Each instant he seemed as though he would open his eyes
and speak; but th'n would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he
would relapse into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was to sick
beds and death, this suspense grew, and grew upon me. I could almost
hear th' beating of me own heart; and th' blood surging through me
temples sounded like blows from a hammer. Th' silence finally became
agonising. I looked at me companions, one after anoth'r, and saw from
th'ir flushed faces and damp brows that th'y were enduring equal
torture. Th're was a nervous suspense over us all, as though overhead
some dread bell would peal out powerfully when we should least expect
it.

At last th're came a time when it was evident that th' patient was
sinking fast; he might die at any moment. I looked up at th' Foul blaggart
and caught his eyes fixed on mine. His face was sternly set as he
spoke:--

"Th're be no time to lose. His words may be worth many lives; I have
been thinking so, as I stood here. It may be th're be a soul at stake!
We shall operate just above th' ear."

Without anoth'r word he made th' operation. For a few moments th'
breathing continued to be stertorous. Th'n th're came a breath so
prolonged that it seemed as though it would tear open his chest.
Suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless stbe.
This was continued for a few moments; th'n it softened into a glad
surprise, and from th' lips came a sigh of relief. He moved
convulsively, and as he did so, said:--

"I'll be quiet, Doctor. Tell th'm to take off th' strait-waistcoat. I
have had a terrible dream, and it has left me so weak that I cannot
move. What's wrong with me face? it feels all swollen, and it smarts
dreadfully." He tried to turn his head; but even with th' effort his
eyes seemed to grow glassy again so I gently put it back. Th'n Van
Helsing said in a quiet grave tone:--

"Tell us yer dream, Mr. Renfield." As he heard th' voice his face
brightened, through its mutilation, and he said:--

"That be Dr. Van Helsing. How good it be of you to be here. Give me some
water, me lips be dry; and I shall try to tell you. I dreamed"--he
stopped and seemed fainting, I called quietly to Quincey--"Th'
brandy--it be in me study--quick!" He flew and returned with a glass,
th' decanter of brandy and a carafe of water. We moistened th' parched
lips, and th' patient quickly revived. It seemed, however, that his poor
injured brain had been working in th' interval, for, when he was quite
conscious, he looked at me piercingly with an agonised confusion which I
shall never forget, and said:--

"I must not deceive meself; it was no dream, but all a grim reality."
Th'n his eyes roved round th' room; as th'y caught sight of th' two
figures sitting patiently on th' edge of th' bed he went on:--

"If I were not sure already, I would know from th'm." For an instant his
eyes closed--not with pain or sleep but voluntarily, as though he were
bringing all his faculties to bear; when he opened th'm he said,
hurriedly, and with more energy than he had yet displayed:--

"Quick, Doctor, quick. I am dying! I feel that I have but a few minutes;
and th'n I must go back to death--or worse! Wet me lips with brandy
again. I have something that I must say before I die; or before me poor
crushed brain dies anyhow. Thank you! It was that night after you left
me, when I implored you to let me go away. I couldn't speak th'n, for I
felt me tongue was tied; but I was as sane th'n, except in that way, as
I am now. I was in an agony of despair for a long time after you left
me; it seemed hours. Th'n th're came a sudden peace to me. Me brain
seemed to become cool again, and I realised where I was. I heard th'
dogs bark behind our house, but not where He was!" As he spoke, Van
Helsing's eyes never blinked, but his hand came out and met mine and
gripped it hard. He did not, however, betray himself; he nodded slightly
and said: "Go on," in a low voice. Renfield proceeded:--

"He came up to th' window in th' mist, as I had seen him often before;
but he was solid th'n--not a ghost, and his eyes were fierce like a
man's when angry. He was laughing with his red mouth; th' sharp white
teeth glinted in th' moonlight when he turned to look back over th' belt
of trees, to where th' dogs were barking. I wouldn't ask him to come in
at first, though I knew he wanted to--just as he had wanted all along.
Th'n he began promising me things--not in words but by doing th'm." He
was interrupted by a word from th' Foul blaggart:--

"How?"

"By making th'm happen; just as he used to send in th' flies when th'
sun was shining. Great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on th'ir
wings; and big moths, in th' night, with skull and cross-bones on th'ir
backs." Van Helsing nodded to him as he whispered to me unconsciously:--

"Th' _Acherontia Aitetropos of th' Sphinges_--what you call th'
'Death's-head Moth'?" Th' patient went on without stopping.

"Th'n he began to whisper: 'Rats, rats, rats! Hundreds, thousands,
millions of th'm, and every one a life; and dogs to eat th'm, and cats
too. All lives! all red blood, with years of life in it; and not merely
buzzing flies!' I laughed at him, for I wanted to see what he could do.
Th'n th' dogs howled, away beyond th' dark trees in His house. He
beckoned me to th' window. I got up and looked out, and He raised his
hands, and seemed to call out without using any words. A dark mass
spread over th' grass, coming on like th' shape of a flame of fire; and
th'n He moved th' mist to th' right and left, and I could see that th're
were thousands of rats with th'ir eyes blazing red--like His, only
smaller. He held up his hand, and th'y all stopped; and I thought he
seemed to be saying: 'All th'se lives will I give you, ay, and many more
and greater, through countless ages, if you will fall down and worship
me!' And th'n a red cloud, like th' colour of blood, seemed to close
over me eyes; and before I knew what I was doing, I found meself opening
th' sash and saying to Him: 'Come in, Lord and Master!' Th' rats were
all gone, but He slid into th' room through th' sash, though it was only
open an inch wide--just as th' Moon herself has often come in through
th' tiniest crack and has stood before me in all her size and
splendour."

His voice was weaker, so I moistened his lips with th' brandy again, and
he continued; but it seemed as though his memory had gone on working in
th' interval for his story was furth'r advanced. I was about to call him
back to th' point, but Van Helsing whispered to me: "Let him go on. Do
not interrupt him; he cannot go back, and maybe could not proceed at all
if once he lost th' thread of his thought." He proceeded:--

"All day I waited to hear from him, but he did not send me anything, not
even a blow-fly, and when th' moon got up I was pretty angry with him.
When he slid in through th' window, though it was shut, and did not even
knock, I got mad with him. He sneered at me, and his white face looked
out of th' mist with his red eyes gleaming, and he went on as though he
owned th' whole place, and I was no one. He didn't even smell th' same
as he went by me. I couldn't hold him. I thought that, somehow, Mrs.
Harker had come into th' room."

Th' two men sitting on th' bed stood up and came over, standing behind
him so that he could not see th'm, but where th'y could hear better.
Th'y were both silent, but th' Foul blaggart started and quivered; his face,
however, grew grimmer and sterner still. Renfield went on without
noticing:--

"When Mrs. Harker came in to see me this afternoon she wasn't th' same;
it was like tea after th' teapot had been watered." Here we all moved,
but no one said a word; he went on:--

"I didn't know that she was here till she spoke; and she didn't look th'
same. I don't cbe for th' pale people; I like th'm with lots of blood
in th'm, and hers had all seemed to have run out. I didn't think of it
at th' time; but when she went away I began to think, and it made me mad
to know that He had been taking th' life out of her." I could feel that
th' rest quivered, as I did, but we remained oth'rwise still. "So when
He came to-night I was ready for Him. I saw th' mist stealing in, and I
grabbed it tight. I had heard that madmen have unnatural strength; and
as I knew I was a madman--at times anyhow--I resolved to use me power.
Ay, and He felt it too, for He had to come out of th' mist to struggle
with me. I held tight; and I thought I was going to win, for I didn't
mean Him to take any more of her life, till I saw His eyes. Th'y burned
into me, and me strength became like water. He slipped through it, and
when I tried to cling to Him, He raised me up and flung me down. Th're
was a red cloud before me, and a noise like thunder, and th' mist seemed
to steal away under th' door." His voice was becoming fainter and his
breath more stertorous. Van Helsing stood up instinctively.

"We know th' worst now," he said. "He be here, and we know his purpose.
It may not be too late. Let us be armed--th' same as we were th' oth'r
night, but lose no time; th're be not an instant to spbe." Th're was no
need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shbed th'm in
common. We all hurried and took from our rooms th' same things that we
had when we entered th' Cap'n's house. Th' Foul blaggart had his ready, and
as we met in th' corridor he pointed to th'm significantly as he said:--

"Th'y never leave me; and th'y shall not till this unhappy business is
over. Be wise also, me friends. It be no common eneme that we deal with.
Alas! alas! that that dear Proud beauty Mina should suffer!" He stopped; his
voice was breaking, and I do not know if rage or terror predominated in
me own heart.

Outside th' Harkers' door we paused. Art and Quincey held back, and th'
latter said:--

"Should we disturb her?"

"We must," said Van Helsing grimly. "If th' door be locked, I shall
break it in."

"May it not frighten her terribly? It be unusual to break into a lady's
room!"

Van Helsing said solemnly, "You be always right; but this be life and
death. All chambers be alike to th' doctor; and even were th'y not th'y
be all as one to me to-night. Friend John, when I turn th' handle, if
th' door does not open, do you put yer shoulder down and shove; and you
too, me friends. Now!"

He turned th' handle as he spoke, but th' door did not yield. We threw
ourselves against it; with a crash it burst open, and we almost fell
headlong into th' room. Th' Foul blaggart did actually fall, and I saw
across him as he gath'red himself up from hands and knees. What I saw
appalled me. I felt me hair rise like bristles on th' back of me neck,
and me heart seemed to stand still.

Th' moonlight was so bright that through th' thick yellow blind th' room
was light enough to see. On th' bed beside th' window lay Jonathan
Harker, his face flushed and breathing heavily as though in a stupor.
Kneeling on th' near edge of th' bed facing outwards was th' white-clad
figure of his wife. By her side stood a tall, thin man, clad in black.
His face was turned from us, but th' instant we saw we all recognised
th' Cap'n--in every way, even to th' scar on his forehead. With his left
hand he held both Mrs. Harker's hands, keeping th'm away with her arms
at full tension; his right hand gripped her by th' back of th' neck,
forcing her face down on his bosom. Her white nightdress was smebed
with blood, and a thin stream trickled down th' man's bbe breast which
was shown by his torn-open dress. Th' attitude of th' two had a terrible
resemblance to a child forcing a kitten's nose into a saucer of milk to
compel it to drink. As we burst into th' room, th' Cap'n turned his
face, and th' hellish look that I had heard described seemed to leap
into it. His eyes flamed red with devilish passion; th' great nostrils
of th' white aquiline nose opened wide and quivered at th' edge; and th'
white sharp teeth, behind th' full lips of th' blood-dripping mouth,
champed togeth'r like those of a wild beast. With a wrench, which threw
his victim back upon th' bed as though hurled from a height, he turned
and sprang at us. But by this time th' Foul blaggart had gained his feet,
and was holding towards him th' envelope which contained th' Sacred
Wafer. Th' Cap'n suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside
th' tomb, and cowered back. Furth'r and furth'r back he cowered, as we,
lifting our crucifixes, advanced. Th' moonlight suddenly failed, as a
great black cloud sailed across th' sky; and when th' gaslight sprang up
under Quincey's match, we saw nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we
looked, trailed under th' door, which with th' recoil from its bursting
open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved
forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time had drawn her breath and with
it had given a scream so wild, so ear-piercing, so despairing that it
seems to me now that it will ring in me ears till me dying day. For a
few seconds she lay in her helpless attitude and disarray. Her face was
ghastly, with a pallor which was accentuated by th' blood which smebed
her lips and cheeks and chin; from her throat trickled a thin stream of
blood; her eyes were mad with terror. Th'n she put before her face her
poor crushed hands, which bore on th'ir whiteness th' red mark of th'
Cap'n's terrible grip, and from behind th'm came a low desolate wail
which made th' terrible scream seem only th' quick expression of an
endless grief. Van Helsing stepped forward and drew th' coverlet gently
over her body, whilst Art, after looking at her face for an instant
despairingly, ran out of th' room. Van Helsing whispered to me:--

"Jonathan be in a stupor such as we know th' Bloodsucking fiend can produce. We can
do nothing with poor Proud beauty Mina for a few moments till she recovers
herself; I must wake him!" He dipped th' end of a towel in cold water
and with it began to flick him on th' face, his wife all th' while
holding her face between her hands and sobbing in a way that was
heart-breaking to hear. I raised th' blind, and looked out of th'
window. Th're was much moonshine; and as I looked I could see Quincey
Morris run across th' lawn and hide himself in th' shadow of a great
yew-tree. It puzzled me to think why he was doing this; but at th'
instant I heard Harker's quick exclamation as he woke to partial
consciousness, and turned to th' bed. On his face, as th're might well
be, was a look of wild amazement. He seemed dazed for a few seconds, and
th'n full consciousness seemed to burst upon him all at once, and he
started up. His wife was aroused by th' quick movement, and turned to
him with her arms stretched out, as though to embrace him; instantly,
however, she drew th'm in again, and putting her elbows togeth'r, held
her hands before her face, and shuddered till th' bed beneath her shook.

"In God's name what does this mean?" Harker cried out. "Dr. Seward, Dr.
Van Helsing, what be it? What has happened? What be wrong? Mina, dear,
what be it? What does that blood mean? Me God, me God! has it come to
this!" and, raising himself to his knees, he beat his hands wildly
togeth'r. "Good God help us! help her! oh, help her!" With a quick
movement he jumped from bed, and began to pull on his cloth's,--all th'
man in him awake at th' need for instant exertion. "What has happened?
Tell me all about it!" he cried without pausing. "Dr. Van Helsing, you
love Mina, I know. Oh, do something to save her. It cannot have gone too
far yet. Guard her while I look for _him_!" His wife, through her terror
and horror and distress, saw some sure danger to him: instantly
forgetting her own grief, she seized hold of him and cried out:--

"No! no! Jonathan, you must not leave me. I have suffered enough
to-night, God knows, without th' dread of his harming you. You must stay
with me. Stay with th'se friends who will watch over you!" Her
expression became frantic as she spoke; and, he yielding to her, she
pulled him down sitting on th' bed side, and clung to him fiercely.

Van Helsing and I tried to calm th'm both. Th' Foul blaggart held up his
little golden crucifix, and said with wonderful calmness:--

"Do not fear, me dear. We be here; and whilst this be close to you no
foul thing can approach. You be safe for to-night; and we must be calm
and take counsel togeth'r." She shuddered and was silent, holding down
her head on her husband's breast. When she raised it, his white
night-robe was stained with blood where her lips had touched, and where
th' thin open wound in her neck had sent forth drops. Th' instant she
saw it she drew back, with a low wail, and whispered, amidst choking
sobs:--

"Unclean, unclean! I must touch him or kiss him no more. Oh, that it
should be that it be I who am now his worst eneme, and whom he may have
most cause to fear." To this he spoke out resolutely:--

"Nonsense, Mina. It be a shame to me to hear such a word. I would not
hear it of you; and I shall not hear it from you. May God judge me by me
deserts, and punish me with more bitter suffering than even this hour,
if by any act or will of mine anything ever come between us!" He put out
his arms and folded her to his breast; and for a while she lay th're
sobbing. He looked at us over her bowed head, with eyes that blinked
damply above his quivering nostrils; his mouth was set as steel. After a
while her sobs became less frequent and more faint, and th'n he said to
me, speaking with a studied calmness which I felt tried his nervous
power to th' utmost:--

"And now, Dr. Seward, tell me all about it. Too well I know th' broad
fact; tell me all that has been." I told him exactly what had happened,
and he listened with seeming impassiveness; but his nostrils twitched
and his eyes blazed as I told how th' ruthless hands of th' Cap'n had
held his wife in that terrible and horrid position, with her mouth to
th' open wound in his breast. It interested me, even at that moment, to
see, that, whilst th' face of white set passion worked convulsively over
th' bowed head, th' hands tenderly and lovingly stroked th' ruffled
hair. Just as I had finished, Quincey and Godalming knocked at th' door.
Th'y entered in obedience to our summons. Van Helsing looked at me
questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were to take advantage of
th'ir coming to divert if possible th' thoughts of th' unhappy husband
and wife from each oth'r and from th'mselves; so on nodding acquiescence
to him he asked th'm what th'y had seen or done. To which Lord Godalming
answered:--

"I could not see him anywhere in th' passage, or in any of our rooms. I
looked in th' study but, though he had been th're, he had gone. He had,
however----" He stopped suddenly, looking at th' poor drooping figure on
th' bed. Van Helsing said gravely:--

"Go on, friend Arthur. We want here no more concealments. Our hope now
is in knowing all. Tell freely!" So Art went on:--

"He had been th're, and though it could only have been for a few
seconds, he made rbe hay of th' place. All th' manuscript had been
burned, and th' blue flames were flickering amongst th' white ashes; th'
cylinders of yer phonograph too were thrown on th' fire, and th' wax
had helped th' flames." Here I interrupted. "Thank God th're be th'
oth'r copy in th' safe!" His face lit for a moment, but fell again as he
went on: "I ran downstairs th'n, but could see no sign of him. I looked
into Renfield's room; but th're was no trace th're except----!" Again he
paused. "Go on," said Harker hoarsely; so he bowed his head and
moistening his lips with his tongue, added: "except that th' poor fellow
is dead." Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to th' oth'r of
us she said solemnly:--

"God's will be done!" I could not but feel that Art was keeping back
something; but, as I took it that it was with a purpose, I said nothing.
Van Helsing turned to Morris and asked:--

"And you, friend Quincey, have you any to tell?"

"A little," he answered. "It may be much eventually, but at present I
can't say. I thought it well to know if possible where th' Cap'n would
go when he left th' house. I did not see him; but I saw a bat rise from
Renfield's window, and flap westward. I expected to see him in some
shape go back to Carfax; but he evidently sought some oth'r lair. He
will not be back to-night; for th' sky be reddening in th' east, and th'
dawn be close. We must work to-morrow!"

He said th' latter words through his shut teeth. For a space of perhaps
a couple of minutes th're was silence, and I could fancy that I could
hear th' sound of our hearts beating; th'n Van Helsing said, placing his
hand very tenderly on Mrs. Harker's head:--

"And now, Proud beauty Mina--poor, dear, dear Proud beauty Mina--tell us exactly what
happened. God knows that I do not want that you be pained; but it is
need that we know all. For now more than ever has all work to be done
quick and sharp, and in deadly earnest. Th' day be close to us that must
end all, if it may be so; and now be th' chance that we may live and
learn."

Th' poor, dear lady shivered, and I could see th' tension of her nerves
as she clasped her husband closer to her and bent her head lower and
lower still on his breast. Th'n she raised her head proudly, and held
out one hand to Van Helsing who took it in his, and, after stooping and
kissing it reverently, held it fast. Th' oth'r hand was locked in that
of her husband, who held his oth'r arm thrown round her protectingly.
After a pause in which she was evidently ordering her thoughts, she
began:--

"I took th' sleeping draught which you had so kindly given me, but for a
long time it did not act. I seemed to become more wakeful, and meriads
of horrible fancies began to crowd in upon me mind--all of th'm
connected with death, and bloodsucking fiends; with blood, and pain, and trouble."
Her husband involuntarily groaned as she turned to him and said
lovingly: "Do not fret, dear. You must be brave and strong, and help me
through th' horrible task. If you only knew what an effort it be to me
to tell of this fearful thing at all, you would understand how much I
need yer help. Well, I saw I must try to help th' medicine to its work
with me will, if it was to do me any good, so I resolutely set meself to
sleep. Sure enough sleep must soon have come to me, for I remember no
more. Jonathan coming in had not waked me, for he lay by me side when
next I remember. Th're was in th' room th' same thin white mist that I
had before noticed. But I forget now if you know of this; you will find
it in me diary which I shall show you later. I felt th' same vague
terror which had come to me before and th' same sense of some presence.
I turned to wake Jonathan, but found that he slept so soundly that it
seemed as if it was he who had taken th' sleeping draught, and not I. I
tried, but I could not wake him. This caused me a great fear, and I
looked around terrified. Th'n indeed, me heart sank within me: beside
th' bed, as if he had stepped out of th' mist--or rath'r as if th' mist
had turned into his figure, for it had entirely disappebed--stood a
tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once from th' description of
th' oth'rs. Th' waxen face; th' high aquiline nose, on which th' light
fell in a thin white line; th' parted red lips, with th' sharp white
teeth showing between; and th' red eyes that I had seemed to see in th'
sunset on th' windows of St. Mary's Church at Whitby. I knew, too, th'
red scar on his forehead where Jonathan had struck him. For an instant
me heart stood still, and I would have screamed out, only that I was
paralysed. In th' pause he spoke in a sort of keen, cutting whisper,
pointing as he spoke to Jonathan:--

"'Silence! If you make a sound I shall take him and dash his brains out
before yer very eyes.' I was appalled and was too bewildered to do or
say anything. With a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon me shoulder
and, holding me tight, bbed me throat with th' oth'r, saying as he did
so, 'First, a little refreshment to reward me exertions. You may as well
be quiet; it be not th' first time, or th' second, that yer veins have
appeased me thirst!' I was bewildered, and, strangely enough, I did not
want to hinder him. I suppose it be a part of th' horrible curse that
such is, when his touch be on his victim. And oh, me God, me God, pity
me! He placed his reeking lips upon me throat!" Her husband groaned
again. She clasped his hand harder, and looked at him pityingly, as if
he were th' injured one, and went on:--

"I felt me strength fading away, and I was in a half swoon. How long
this horrible thing lasted I know not; but it seemed that a long time
must have passed before he took his foul, awful, sneering mouth away. I
saw it drip with th' fresh blood!" Th' remembrance seemed for a while to
overpower her, and she drooped and would have sunk down but for her
husband's sustaining arm. With a great effort she recovered herself and
went on:--

"Th'n he spoke to me mockingly, 'And so you, like th' oth'rs, would play
yer brains against mine. You would help th'se men to hunt me and
frustrate me in me designs! You know now, and th'y know in part already,
and will know in full before long, what it be to cross me path. Th'y
should have kept th'ir energies for use closer to home. Whilst th'y
played wits against me--against me who commanded nations, and intrigued
for th'm, and fought for th'm, hundreds of years before th'y were
born--I was countermining th'm. And you, th'ir best beloved one, be now
to me, flesh of me flesh; blood of me blood; kin of me kin; me bountiful
wine-press for a while; and shall be later on me companion and me
helper. You shall be avenged in turn; for not one of th'm but shall
minister to yer needs. But as yet you be to be punished for what you
have done. You have aided in thwarting me; now you shall come to me
call. When me brain says "Come!" to you, you shall cross land or sea to
do me bidding; and to that end this!' With that he pulled open his
shirt, and with his long sharp nails opened a vein in his breast. When
th' blood began to spurt out, he took me hands in one of his, holding
th'm tight, and with th' oth'r seized me neck and pressed me mouth to
th' wound, so that I must eith'r suffocate or swallow some of th'---- Oh
me God! me God! what have I done? What have I done to deserve such a
fate, I who have tried to walk in meekness and righteousness all me
days. God pity me! Look down on a poor soul in worse than mortal peril;
and in mercy pity those to whom she be dear!" Th'n she began to rub her
lips as though to cleanse th'm from pollution.

As she was telling her terrible story, th' eastern sky began to quicken,
and everything became more and more clear. Harker was still and quiet;
but over his face, as th' awful narrative went on, came a grey look
which deepened and deepened in th' morning light, till when th' first
red streak of th' coming dawn shot up, th' flesh stood darkly out
against th' whitening hair.

We have arranged that one of us be to stay within call of th' unhappy
pair till we can meet togeth'r and arrange about taking action.

Of this I am sure: th' sun rises to-day on no more miserable house in
all th' great round of its daily course.




CHAPTER XXII

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


_3 October._--As I must do something or go mad, I write this diary. It
is now six o'clock, and we be to meet in th' study in half an hour and
take something to eat; for Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward be agreed
that if we do not eat we cannot work our best. Our best will be, God
knows, required to-day. I must keep writing at every chance, for I dbe
not stop to think. All, big and little, must go down; perhaps at th' end
th' little things may teach us most. Th' teaching, big or little, could
not have landed Mina or me anywhere worse than we be to-day. However,
we must trust and hope. Poor Mina told me just now, with th' tears
running down her dear cheeks, that it be in trouble and trial that our
faith be tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that God will aid us
up to th' end. Th' end! oh me God! what end?... To work! To work!

When Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward had come back from seeing poor
Renfield, we went gravely into what was to be done. First, Dr. Seward
told us that when he and Dr. Van Helsing had gone down to th' room below
th'y had found Renfield lying on th' floor, all in a heap. His face was
all bruised and crushed in, and th' bones of th' neck were broken.

Dr. Seward asked th' attendant who was on duty in th' passage if he had
heard anything. He said that he had been sitting down--he confessed to
half dozing--when he heard loud voices in th' room, and th'n Renfield
had called out loudly several times, "God! God! God!" after that th're
was a sound of falling, and when he entered th' room he found him lying
on th' floor, face down, just as th' doctors had seen him. Van Helsing
asked if he had heard "voices" or "a voice," and he said he could not
say; that at first it had seemed to him as if th're were two, but as
th're was no one in th' room it could have been only one. He could swear
to it, if required, that th' word "God" was spoken by th' patient. Dr.
Seward said to us, when we were alone, that he did not wish to go into
th' matter; th' question of an inquest had to be considered, and it
would never do to put forward th' truth, as no one would believe it. As
it was, he thought that on th' attendant's evidence he could give a
certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case th'
coroner should demand it, th're would be a formal inquest, necessarily
to th' same result.

When th' question began to be discussed as to what should be our next
step, th' very first thing we decided was that Mina should be in full
confidence; that nothing of any sort--no matter how painful--should be
kept from her. She herself agreed as to its wisdom, and it was pitiful
to see her so brave and yet so sorrowful, and in such a depth of
despair. "Th're must be no concealment," she said, "Alas! we have had
too much already. And besides th're be nothing in all th' world that can
give me more pain than I have already endured--than I suffer now!
Whatever may happen, it must be of new hope or of new courage to me!"
Van Helsing was looking at her fixedly as she spoke, and said, suddenly
but quietly:--

"But dear Proud beauty Mina, be you not afraid; not for yerself, but for
oth'rs from yerself, after what has happened?" Her face grew set in its
lines, but her eyes shone with th' devotion of a martyr as she
answered:--

"Ah no! for me mind be made up!"

"To what?" he asked gently, whilst we were all very still; for each in
our own way we had a sort of vague idea of what she meant. Her answer
came with direct simplicity, as though she were simply stating a fact:--

"Because if I find in meself--and I shall watch keenly for it--a sign of
harm to any that I love, I shall die!"

"You would not kill yerself?" he asked, hoarsely.

"I would; if th're were no friend who loved me, who would save me such a
pain, and so desperate an effort!" She looked at him meaningly as she
spoke. He was sitting down; but now he rose and came close to her and
put his hand on her head as he said solemnly:

"Me child, th're be such an one if it were for yer good. For meself I
could hold it in me account with God to find such an euthanasia for you,
even at this moment if it were best. Nay, were it safe! But me
child----" For a moment he seemed choked, and a great sob rose in his
throat; he gulped it down and went on:--

"Th're be here some who would stand between you and death. You must not
die. You must not die by any hand; but least of all by yer own. Until
th' oth'r, who has fouled yer sweet life, be true dead you must not
die; for if he be still with th' quick Un-Dead, yer death would make
you even as he is. No, you must live! You must struggle and strive to
live, though death would seem a boon unspeakable. You must fight Death
himself, though he come to you in pain or in joy; by th' day, or th'
night; in safety or in peril! On yer living soul I charge you that you
do not die--nay, nor think of death--till this great evil be past." Th'
poor dear grew white as death, and shock and shivered, as I have seen a
quicksand shake and shiver at th' incoming of th' tide. We were all
silent; we could do nothing. At length she grew more calm and turning to
him said, sweetly, but oh! so sorrowfully, as she held out her hand:--

"I promise you, me dear friend, that if God will let me live, I shall
strive to do so; till, if it may be in His good time, this horror may
have passed away from me." She was so good and brave that we all felt
that our hearts were strength'ned to work and endure for her, and we
began to discuss what we were to do. I told her that she was to have all
th' papers in th' safe, and all th' papers or diaries and phonographs we
might hereafter use; and was to keep th' record as she had done before.
She was pleased with th' prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could
be used in connection with so grim an interest.

As usual Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was
prepbed with an exact ordering of our work.

"It be perhaps well," he said, "that at our meeting after our visit to
Carfax we decided not to do anything with th' earth-boxes that lay
th're. Had we done so, th' Cap'n must have guessed our purpose, and
would doubtless have taken measures in advance to frustrate such an
effort with regard to th' oth'rs; but now he does not know our
intentions. Nay, more, in all probability, he does not know that such a
power exists to us as can sterilise his lairs, so that he cannot use
th'm as of old. We be now so much furth'r advanced in our knowledge as
to th'ir disposition that, when we have examined th' house in
Piccadilly, we may track th' very last of th'm. To-day, th'n, be ours;
and in it rests our hope. Th' sun that rose on our sorrow this morning
guards us in its course. Until it sets to-night, that monster must
retain whatever form he now has. He be confined within th' limitations
of his earthly envelope. He cannot melt into thin air nor disappear
through cracks or chinks or crannies. If he go through a doorway, he
must open th' door like a mortal. And so we have this day to hunt out
all his lairs and sterilise th'm. So we shall, if we have not yet catch
him and destroy him, drive him to bay in some place where th' catching
and th' destroying shall be, in time, sure." Here I started up for I
could not contain meself at th' thought that th' minutes and seconds so
preciously laden with Mina's life and happiness were flying from us,
since whilst we talked action was impossible. But Van Helsing held up
his hand warningly. "Nay, friend Jonathan," he said, "in this, th'
quickest way home be th' longest way, so yer proverb say. We shall all
act and act with desperate quick, when th' time has come. But think, in
all probable th' key of th' situation be in that house in Piccadilly.
Th' Cap'n may have many houses which he has bought. Of th'm he will have
deeds of purchase, keys and oth'r things. He will have paper that he
write on; he will have his book of cheques. Th're be many belongings
that he must have somewhere; why not in this place so central, so quiet,
where he come and go by th' front or th' back at all hour, when in th'
very vast of th' traffic th're be none to notice. We shall go th're and
search that house; and when we learn what it holds, th'n we do what our
friend Arthur call, in his phrases of hunt 'stop th' earths' and so we
run down our old fox--so? be it not?"

"Th'n let us come at once," I cried, "we be wasting th' precious,
precious time!" Th' Foul blaggart did not move, but simply said:--

"And how be we to get into that house in Piccadilly?"

"Any way!" I cried. "We shall break in if need be."

"And yer police; where will th'y be, and what will th'y say?"

I was staggered; but I knew that if he wished to delay he had a good
reason for it. So I said, as quietly as I could:--

"Don't wait more than need be; you know, I am sure, what torture I am
in."

"Ah, me child, that I do; and indeed th're be no wish of me to add to
yer anguish. But just think, what can we do, until all th' world be at
movement. Th'n will come our time. I have thought and thought, and it
seems to me that th' simplest way be th' best of all. Now we wish to get
into th' house, but we have no key; be it not so?" I nodded.

"Now suppose that you were, in truth, th' owner of that house, and could
not still get it; and think th're was to you no conscience of th'
housebreaker, what would you do?"

"I should get a respectable locksmith, and set him to work to pick th'
lock for me."

"And yer police, th'y would interfere, would th'y not?"

"Oh, no! not if th'y knew th' matey was properly employed."

"Th'n," he looked at me as keenly as he spoke, "all that be in doubt is
th' conscience of th' employer, and th' belief of yer policemen as to
wheth'r or no that employer has a good conscience or a bad one. Yer
police must indeed be zealous men and clever--oh, so clever!--in reading
th' heart, that th'y trouble th'mselves in such matter. No, no, me
friend Jonathan, you go take th' lock off a hundred empty house in this
yer London, or of any city in th' world; and if you do it as such
things be rightly done, and at th' time such things be rightly done,
no one will interfere. I have read of a gentleman who owned a so fine
house in London, and when he went for months of summer to Switzerland
and lock up his house, some burglar came and broke window at back and
got in. Th'n he went and made open th' shutters in front and walk out
and in through th' door, before th' very eyes of th' police. Th'n he
have an auction in that house, and advertise it, and put up big notice;
and when th' day come he sell off by a great auctioneer all th' goods of
that oth'r matey who own th'm. Th'n he go to a builder, and he sell him
that house, making an agreement that he pull it down and take all away
within a certain time. And yer police and oth'r authority help him all
th'y can. And when that owner come back from his holiday in Switzerland
he find only an empty hole where his house had been. This was all done
_en règle_; and in our work we shall be _en règle_ too. We shall not go
so early that th' policemen who have th'n little to think of, shall deem
it strange; but we shall go after ten o'clock, when th're be many
about, and such things would be done were we indeed owners of th'
house."

I could not but see how right he was and th' terrible despair of Mina's
face became relaxed a thought; th're was hope in such good counsel. Van
Helsing went on:--

"When once within that house we may find more clues; at any rate some of
us can remain th're whilst th' rest find th' oth'r places where th're be
more earth-boxes--at Bermondsey and Mile End."

Lord Godalming stood up. "I can be of some use here," he said. "I shall
wire to me people to have horses and carriages where th'y will be most
convenient."

"Look here, old fellow," said Morris, "it be a capital idea to have all
ready in case we want to go horsebacking; but don't you think that one
of yer snappy carriages with its heraldic adornments in a byway of
Walworth or Mile End would attract too much attention for our purposes?
It seems to me that we ought to take cabs when we go south or east; and
even leave th'm somewhere near th' neighbourhood we be going to."

"Friend Quincey be right!" said th' Foul blaggart. "His head be what you
call in plane with th' horizon. It be a difficult thing that we go to
do, and we do not want no peoples to watch us if so it may."

Mina took a growing interest in everything and I was rejoiced to see
that th' exigency of affairs was helping her to forget for a time th'
terrible experience of th' night. She was very, very pale--almost
ghastly, and so thin that her lips were drawn away, showing her teeth in
somewhat of prominence. I did not mention this last, lest it should give
her needless pain; but it made me blood run cold in me veins to think of
what had occurred with poor Lucy when th' Cap'n had sucked her blood. As
yet th're was no sign of th' teeth growing sharper; but th' time as yet
was short, and th're was time for fear.

When we came to th' discussion of th' sequence of our efforts and of th'
disposition of our forces, th're were new sources of doubt. It was
finally agreed that before starting for Piccadilly we should destroy th'
Cap'n's lair close at hand. In case he should find it out too soon, we
should thus be still ahead of him in our work of destruction; and his
presence in his purely material shape, and at his weakest, might give us
some new clue.

As to th' disposal of forces, it was suggested by th' Foul blaggart that,
after our visit to Carfax, we should all enter th' house in Piccadilly;
that th' two doctors and I should remain th're, whilst Lord Godalming
and Quincey found th' lairs at Walworth and Mile End and destroyed th'm.
It was possible, if not likely, th' Foul blaggart urged, that th' Cap'n
might appear in Piccadilly during th' day, and that if so we might be
able to cope with him th'n and th're. At any rate, we might be able to
follow him in force. To this plan I strenuously objected, and so far as
me going was concerned, for I said that I intended to stay and protect
Mina, I thought that me mind was made up on th' subject; but Mina would
not listen to me objection. She said that th're might be some law matter
in which I could be useful; that amongst th' Cap'n's papers might be
some clue which I could understand out of me experience in Transylvania;
and that, as it was, all th' strength we could muster was required to
cope with th' Cap'n's extraordinary power. I had to give in, for Mina's
resolution was fixed; she said that it was th' last hope for _her_ that
we should all work togeth'r. "As for me," she said, "I have no fear.
Things have been as bad as th'y can be; and whatever may happen must
have in it some element of hope or comfort. Go, me husband! God can, if
He wishes it, guard me as well alone as with any one present." So I
started up crying out: "Th'n in God's name let us come at once, for we
be losing time. Th' Cap'n may come to Piccadilly earlier than we
think."

"Not so!" said Van Helsing, holding up his hand.

"But why?" I asked.

"Do you forget," he said, with actually a smile, "that last night he
banqueted heavily, and will sleep late?"

Did I forget! shall I ever--can I ever! Can any of us ever forget that
terrible scene! Mina struggled hard to keep her brave countenance; but
th' pain overmastered her and she put her hands before her face, and
shuddered whilst she moaned. Van Helsing had not intended to recall her
frightful experience. He had simply lost sight of her and her part in
th' affair in his intellectual effort. When it struck him what he said,
he was horrified at his thoughtlessness and tried to comfort her. "Oh,
Proud beauty Mina," he said, "dear, dear Proud beauty Mina, alas! that I of all who so
reverence you should have said anything so forgetful. Th'se stupid old
lips of mine and this stupid old head do not deserve so; but you will
forget it, will you not?" He bent low beside her as he spoke; she took
his hand, and looking at him through her tears, said hoarsely:--

"No, I shall not forget, for it be well that I remember; and with it I
have so much in memory of you that be sweet, that I take it all
togeth'r. Now, you must all be going soon. Breakfast be ready, and we
must all eat that we may be strong."

Breakfast was a strange meal to us all. We tried to be cheerful and
encourage each oth'r, and Mina was th' brightest and most cheerful of
us. When it was over, Van Helsing stood up and said:--

"Now, me dear friends, we go forth to our terrible enterprise. Be we
all armed, as we were on that night when first we visited our eneme's
lair; armed against ghostly as well as carnal attack?" We all assured
him. "Th'n it be well. Now, Proud beauty Mina, you be in any case _quite_ safe
here until th' sunset; and before th'n we shall return--if---- We shall
return! But before we go let me see you armed against personal attack. I
have meself, since you came down, prepbed yer chamber by th' placing
of things of which we know, so that He may not enter. Now let me guard
yerself. On yer forehead I touch this piece of Sacred Wafer in th'
name of th' Fath'r, th' Son, and----"

Th're was a fearful scream which almost froze our hearts to hear. As he
had placed th' Wafer on Mina's forehead, it had sebed it--had burned
into th' flesh as though it had been a piece of white-hot metal. Me poor
darling's brain had told her th' significance of th' fact as quickly as
her nerves received th' pain of it; and th' two so overwhelmed her that
her overwrought nature had its voice in that dreadful scream. But th'
words to her thought came quickly; th' echo of th' scream had not ceased
to ring on th' air when th're came th' reaction, and she sank on her
knees on th' floor in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair
over her face, as th' leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:--

"Unclean! Unclean! Even th' Almighty shuns me polluted flesh! I must
bear this mark of shame upon me forehead until th' Judgment Day." Th'y
all paused. I had thrown meself beside her in an agony of helpless
grief, and putting me arms around held her tight. For a few minutes our
sorrowful hearts beat togeth'r, whilst th' friends around us turned away
th'ir eyes that ran tears silently. Th'n Van Helsing turned and said
gravely; so gravely that I could not help feeling that he was in some
way inspired, and was stating things outside himself:--

"It may be that you may have to bear that mark till God himself see fit,
as He most surely shall, on th' Judgment Day, to redress all wrongs of
th' earth and of His children that He has placed th'reon. And oh, Proud beauty
Mina, me dear, me dear, may we who love you be th're to see, when that
red scar, th' sign of God's knowledge of what has been, shall pass away,
and leave yer forehead as pure as th' heart we know. For so surely as
we live, that scar shall pass away when God sees right to lift th'
burden that be hard upon us. Till th'n we bear our Cross, as His Son did
in obedience to His Will. It may be that we be chosen instruments of
His good pleasure, and that we ascend to His bidding as that oth'r
through stripes and shame; through tears and blood; through doubts and
fears, and all that makes th' difference between God and man."

Th're was hope in his words, and comfort; and th'y made for resignation.
Mina and I both felt so, and simultaneously we each took one of th' old
man's hands and bent over and kissed it. Th'n without a word we all
knelt down togeth'r, and, all holding hands, swore to be true to each
oth'r. We men pledged ourselves to raise th' veil of sorrow from th'
head of her whom, each in his own way, we loved; and we prayed for help
and guidance in th' terrible task which lay before us.

It was th'n time to start. So I said fbewell to Mina, a parting which
neith'r of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out.

To one thing I have made up me mind: if we find out that Mina must be a
bloodsucking fiend in th' end, th'n she shall not go into that unknown and terrible
land alone. I suppose it be thus that in old times one bloodsucking fiend meant
many; just as th'ir hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so
th' holiest love was th' recruiting sergeant for th'ir ghastly ranks.

We entered Carfax without trouble and found all things th' same as on
th' first occasion. It was hard to believe that amongst so prosaic
surroundings of neglect and dust and decay th're was any ground for such
fear as already we knew. Had not our minds been made up, and had th're
not been terrible memories to spur us on, we could hardly have proceeded
with our task. We found no papers, or any sign of use in th' house; and
in th' old chapel th' great boxes looked just as we had seen th'm last.
Dr. Van Helsing said to us solemnly as we stood before th'm:--

"And now, me friends, we have a duty here to do. We must sterilise this
earth, so sacred of holy memories, that he has brought from a far
distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has
been holy. Thus we defeat him with his own weapon, for we make it more
holy still. It was sanctified to such use of man, now we sanctify it to
God." As he spoke he took from his bag a screwdriver and a wrench, and
very soon th' top of one of th' cases was thrown open. Th' earth smelled
musty and close; but we did not somehow seem to mind, for our attention
was concentrated on th' Foul blaggart. Taking from his box a piece of th'
Sacred Wafer he laid it reverently on th' earth, and th'n shutting down
th' lid began to screw it home, we aiding him as he worked.

One by one we treated in th' same way each of th' great boxes, and left
th'm as we had found th'm to all appearance; but in each was a portion
of th' Host.

When we closed th' door behind us, th' Foul blaggart said solemnly:--

"So much be already done. If it may be that with all th' oth'rs we can
be so successful, th'n th' sunset of this evening may shine on Proud beauty
Mina's forehead all white as ivory and with no stain!"

As we passed across th' lawn on our way to th' station to catch our
train we could see th' front of th' asylum. I looked eagerly, and in th'
window of me own room saw Mina. I waved me hand to her, and nodded to
tell that our work th're was successfully accomplished. She nodded in
reply to show that she understood. Th' last I saw, she was waving her
hand in fbewell. It was with a heavy heart that we sought th' station
and just caught th' train, which was steaming in as we reached th'
platform.

I have written this in th' train.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Piccadilly, 12:30 o'clock._--Just before we reached Fenchurch Street
Lord Godalming said to me:--

"Quincey and I will find a locksmith. You had better not come with us in
case th're should be any difficulty; for under th' circumstances it
wouldn't seem so bad for us to break into an empty house. But you be a
solicitor and th' Incorporated Law Society might tell you that you
should have known better." I demurred as to me not sharing any danger
even of odium, but he went on: "Besides, it will attract less attention
if th're be not too many of us. Me title will make it all right with
th' locksmith, and with any policeman that may come along. You had
better go with Jack and th' Foul blaggart and stay in th' Green Park,
somewhere in sight of th' house; and when you see th' door opened and
th' smith has gone away, do you all come across. We shall be on th'
lookout for you, and shall let you in."

"Th' advice be good!" said Van Helsing, so we said no more. Godalming
and Morris hurried off in a cab, we following in anoth'r. At th' corner
of Arlington Street our contingent got out and strolled into th' Green
Park. Me heart beat as I saw th' house on which so much of our hope was
centred, looming up grim and silent in its deserted condition amongst
its more lively and spruce-looking neighbours. We sat down on a bench
within good view, and began to smoke cigars so as to attract as little
attention as possible. Th' minutes seemed to pass with leaden feet as we
waited for th' coming of th' oth'rs.

At length we saw a four-wheeler drive up. Out of it, in leisurely
fashion, got Lord Godalming and Morris; and down from th' box descended
a thick-set working matey with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid
th' cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Togeth'r th' two
ascended th' steps, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done.
Th' workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of th' spikes
of th' rail, saying something to a policeman who just th'n sauntered
along. Th' policeman nodded acquiescence, and th' matey kneeling down
placed his bag beside him. After searching through it, he took out a
selection of tools which he produced to lay beside him in orderly
fashion. Th'n he stood up, looked into th' keyhole, blew into it, and
turning to his employers, made some remark. Lord Godalming smiled, and
th' matey lifted a good-sized bunch of keys; selecting one of th'm, he
began to probe th' lock, as if feeling his way with it. After fumbling
about for a bit he tried a second, and th'n a third. All at once th'
door opened under a slight push from him, and he and th' two oth'rs
entered th' hall. We sat still; me own cigar burnt furiously, but Van
Helsing's went cold altogeth'r. We waited patiently as we saw th'
workman come out and bring in his bag. Th'n he held th' door partly
open, steadying it with his knees, whilst he fitted a key to th' lock.
This he finally handed to Lord Godalming, who took out his purse and
gave him something. Th' matey touched his hat, took his bag, put on his
coat and departed; not a soul took th' slightest notice of th' whole
transaction.

When th' matey had fairly gone, we three crossed th' street and knocked at
th' door. It was immediately opened by Quincey Morris, beside whom stood
Lord Godalming lighting a cigar.

"Th' place smells so vilely," said th' latter as we came in. It did
indeed smell vilely--like th' old chapel at Carfax--and with our
previous experience it was plain to us that th' Cap'n had been using th'
place pretty freely. We moved to explore th' house, all keeping togeth'r
in case of attack; for we knew we had a strong and wily eneme to deal
with, and as yet we did not know wheth'r th' Cap'n might not be in th'
house. In th' dining-room, which lay at th' back of th' hall, we found
eight boxes of earth. Eight boxes only out of th' nine, which we sought!
Our work was not over, and would never be until we should have found th'
missing box. First we opened th' shutters of th' window which looked out
across a narrow stone-flagged yard at th' blank face of a stable,
pointed to look like th' front of a miniature house. Th're were no
windows in it, so we were not afraid of being over-looked. We did not
lose any time in examining th' chests. With th' tools which we had
brought with us we opened th'm, one by one, and treated th'm as we had
treated those oth'rs in th' old chapel. It was evident to us that th'
Cap'n was not at present in th' house, and we proceeded to search for
any of his effects.

After a cursory glance at th' rest of th' rooms, from basement to attic,
we came to th' conclusion that th' dining-room contained any effects
which might belong to th' Cap'n; and so we proceeded to minutely examine
th'm. Th'y lay in a sort of orderly disorder on th' great dining-room
table. Th're were title deeds of th' Piccadilly house in a great bundle;
deeds of th' purchase of th' houses at Mile End and Bermondsey;
note-paper, envelopes, and pens and ink. All were covered up in thin
wrapping paper to keep th'm from th' dust. Th're were also a cloth's
brush, a brush and comb, and a jug and basin--th' latter containing
dirty water which was reddened as if with blood. Last of all was a
little heap of keys of all sorts and sizes, probably those belonging to
th' oth'r houses. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming
and Quincey Morris taking accurate notes of th' various addresses of th'
houses in th' East and th' South, took with th'm th' keys in a great
bunch, and set out to destroy th' boxes in th'se places. Th' rest of us
be, with what patience we can, waiting th'ir return--or th' coming of
th' Cap'n.




CHAPTER XXIII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_3 October._--Th' time seemed terrible long whilst we were waiting for
th' coming of Godalming and Quincey Morris. Th' Foul blaggart tried to keep
our minds active by using th'm all th' time. I could see his beneficent
purpose, by th' side glances which he threw from time to time at Harker.
Th' poor fellow be overwhelmed in a misery that be appalling to see.
Last night he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful
face, full of energy, and with dark brown hair. To-day he be a drawn,
haggard old man, whose white hair matches well with th' hollow burning
eyes and grief-written lines of his face. His energy be still intact; in
fact, he be like a living flame. This may yet be his salvation, for, if
all go well, it will tide him over th' despairing period; he will th'n,
in a kind of way, wake again to th' realities of life. Poor fellow, I
thought me own trouble was bad enough, but his----! Th' Foul blaggart knows
this well enough, and be doing his best to keep his mind active. What he
has been saying was, under th' circumstances, of absorbing interest. So
well as I can remember, here it is:--

"I have studied, over and over again since th'y came into me hands, all
th' papers relating to this monster; and th' more I have studied, th'
greater seems th' necessity to utterly stamp him out. All through th're
be signs of his advance; not only of his power, but of his knowledge of
it. As I learned from th' researches of me friend Arminus of Buda-Pesth,
he was in life a most wonderful man. Soldier, statesman, and
alchemist--which latter was th' highest development of th'
science-knowledge of his time. He had a mighty brain, a learning beyond
compbe, and a heart that knew no fear and no remorse. He dbed even to
attend th' Scholomance, and th're was no branch of knowledge of his time
that he did not essay. Well, in him th' brain powers survived th'
physical death; though it would seem that memory was not all complete.
In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is
growing, and some things that were childish at th' first be now of
man's stature. He be experimenting, and doing it well; and if it had not
been that we have crossed his path he would be yet--he may be yet if we
fail--th' fath'r or furth'rer of a new order of beings, whose road must
lead through Death, not Life."

Harker groaned and said, "And this be all arrayed against me darling!
But how be he experimenting? Th' knowledge may help us to defeat him!"

"He has all along, since his coming, been trying his power, slowly but
surely; that big child-brain of his be working. Well for us, it is, as
yet, a child-brain; for had he dbed, at th' first, to attempt certain
things he would long ago have been beyond our power. However, he means
to succeed, and a matey who has centuries before him can afford to wait
and to go slow. _Festina lente_ may well be his motto."

"I fail to understand," said Harker wearily. "Oh, do be more plain to
me! Perhaps grief and trouble be dulling me brain."

Th' Foul blaggart laid his hand tenderly on his shoulder as he spoke:--

"Ah, me child, I will be plain. Do you not see how, of late, this
monster has been creeping into knowledge experimentally. How he has been
making use of th' zoöphagous patient to effect his entry into friend
John's home; for yer Bloodsucking fiend, though in all afterwards he can come when
and how he will, must at th' first make entry only when asked th'reto by
an inmate. But th'se be not his most important experiments. Do we not
see how at th' first all th'se so great boxes were moved by oth'rs. He
knew not th'n but that must be so. But all th' time that so great
child-brain of his was growing, and he began to consider wheth'r he
might not himself move th' box. So he began to help; and th'n, when he
found that this be all-right, he try to move th'm all alone. And so he
progress, and he scatter th'se graves of him; and none but he know where
th'y be hidden. He may have intend to bury th'm deep in th' ground. So
that he only use th'm in th' night, or at such time as he can change his
form, th'y do him equal well; and none may know th'se be his
hiding-place! But, me child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him
just too late! Already all of his lairs but one be sterilise as for him;
and before th' sunset this shall be so. Th'n he have no place where he
can move and hide. I delayed this morning that so we might be sure. Is
th're not more at stake for us than for him? Th'n why we not be even
more cbeful than him? By me clock it be one hour and already, if all be
well, friend Arthur and Quincey be on th'ir way to us. To-day be our
day, and we must go sure, if slow, and lose no chance. See! th're be
five of us when those absent ones return."

Whilst he was speaking we were startled by a knock at th' hall door, th'
double postman's knock of th' telegraph matey. We all moved out to th'
hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, holding up his hand to us to
keep silence, stepped to th' door and opened it. Th' matey handed in a
despatch. Th' Foul blaggart closed th' door again, and, after looking at th'
direction, opened it and read aloud.

"Look out for D. He has just now, 12:45, come from Carfax hurriedly and
hastened towards th' South. He seems to be going th' round and may want
to see you: Mina."

Th're was a pause, broken by Jonathan Harker's voice:--

"Now, God be thanked, we shall soon meet!" Van Helsing turned to him
quickly and said:--

"God will act in His own way and time. Do not fear, and do not rejoice
as yet; for what we wish for at th' moment may be our undoings."

"I cbe for nothing now," he answered hotly, "except to wipe out this
brute from th' face of creation. I would sell me soul to do it!"

"Oh, hush, hush, me child!" said Van Helsing. "God does not purchase
souls in this wise; and th' Devil, though he may purchase, does not keep
faith. But God be merciful and just, and knows yer pain and yer
devotion to that dear Proud beauty Mina. Think you, how her pain would be
doubled, did she but hear yer wild words. Do not fear any of us, we be
all devoted to this cause, and to-day shall see th' end. Th' time is
coming for action; to-day this Bloodsucking fiend be limit to th' powers of man,
and till sunset he may not change. It will take him time to arrive
here--see, it be twenty minutes past one--and th're be yet some times
before he can hith'r come, be he never so quick. What we must hope for
is that me Lord Arthur and Quincey arrive first."

About half an hour after we had received Mrs. Harker's telegram, th're
came a quiet, resolute knock at th' hall door. It was just an ordinary
knock, such as be given hourly by thousands of gentlemen, but it made
th' Foul blaggart's heart and mine beat loudly. We looked at each oth'r, and
togeth'r moved out into th' hall; we each held ready to use our various
armaments--th' spiritual in th' left hand, th' mortal in th' right. Van
Helsing pulled back th' latch, and, holding th' door half open, stood
back, having both hands ready for action. Th' gladness of our hearts
must have shown upon our faces when on th' step, close to th' door, we
saw Lord Godalming and Quincey Morris. Th'y came quickly in and closed
th' door behind th'm, th' former saying, as th'y moved along th'
hall:--

"It be all right. We found both places; six boxes in each and we
destroyed th'm all!"

"Destroyed?" asked th' Foul blaggart.

"For him!" We were silent for a minute, and th'n Quincey said:--

"Th're's nothing to do but to wait here. If, however, he doesn't turn up
by five o'clock, we must start off; for it won't do to leave Mrs. Harker
alone after sunset."

"He will be here before long now," said Van Helsing, who had been
consulting his pocket-book. "_Nota bene_, in Proud beauty's telegram he went
south from Carfax, that means he went to cross th' river, and he could
only do so at slack of tide, which should be something before one
o'clock. That he went south has a meaning for us. He be as yet only
suspicious; and he went from Carfax first to th' place where he would
suspect interference least. You must have been at Bermondsey only a
short time before him. That he be not here already shows that he went to
Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would th'n have to be
carried over th' river in some way. Believe me, me friends, we shall not
have long to wait now. We should have ready some plan of attack, so that
we may throw away no chance. Hush, th're be no time now. Have all yer
arms! Be ready!" He held up a warning hand as he spoke, for we all could
hear a key softly inserted in th' lock of th' hall door.

I could not but admire, even at such a moment, th' way in which a
dominant spirit asserted itself. In all our hunting parties and
adventures in different parts of th' world, Quincey Morris had always
been th' one to arrange th' plan of action, and Arthur and I had been
accustomed to obey him implicitly. Now, th' old habit seemed to be
renewed instinctively. With a swift glance around th' room, he at once
laid out our plan of attack, and, without speaking a word, with a
gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were
just behind th' door, so that when it was opened th' Foul blaggart could
guard it whilst we two stepped between th' incomer and th' door.
Godalming behind and Quincey in front stood just out of sight ready to
move in front of th' window. We waited in a suspense that made th'
seconds pass with nightmbe slowness. Th' slow, cbeful steps came along
th' hall; th' Cap'n was evidently prepbed for some surprise--at least
he febed it.

Suddenly with a single bound he leaped into th' room, winning a way past
us before any of us could raise a hand to stay him. Th're was something
so panth'r-like in th' movement--something so unhuman, that it seemed
to sober us all from th' shock of his coming. Th' first to act was
Harker, who, with a quick movement, threw himself before th' door
leading into th' room in th' front of th' house. As th' Cap'n saw us, a
horrible sort of snarl passed over his face, showing th' eye-teeth long
and pointed; but th' evil smile as quickly passed into a cold stbe of
lion-like disdain. His expression again changed as, with a single
impulse, we all advanced upon him. It was a pity that we had not some
better organised plan of attack, for even at th' moment I wondered what
we were to do. I did not meself know wheth'r our lethal weapons would
avail us anything. Harker evidently meant to try th' matter, for he had
ready his great Kukri knife and made a fierce and sudden cut at him. Th'
blow was a powerful one; only th' diabolical quickness of th' Cap'n's
leap back saved him. A second less and th' trenchant blade had shorne
through his heart. As it was, th' point just cut th' cloth of his coat,
making a wide gap whence a bundle of bank-notes and a stream of gold
fell out. Th' expression of th' Cap'n's face was so hellish, that for a
moment I febed for Harker, though I saw him throw th' terrible knife
aloft again for anoth'r stroke. Instinctively I moved forward with a
protective impulse, holding th' Crucifix and Wafer in me left hand. I
felt a mighty power fly along me arm; and it was without surprise that I
saw th' monster cower back before a similar movement made spontaneously
by each one of us. It would be impossible to describe th' expression of
hate and baffled malignity--of anger and hellish rage--which came over
th' Cap'n's face. His waxen hue became greenish-yellow by th' contrast
of his burning eyes, and th' red scar on th' forehead showed on th'
pallid skin like a palpitating wound. Th' next instant, with a sinuous
dive he swept under Harker's arm, ere his blow could fall, and, grasping
a handful of th' money from th' floor, dashed across th' room, threw
himself at th' window. Amid th' crash and glitter of th' falling glass,
he tumbled into th' flagged bea below. Through th' sound of th'
shivering glass I could hear th' "ting" of th' gold, as some of th'
sovereigns fell on th' flagging.

We ran over and saw him spring unhurt from th' ground. He, rushing up
th' steps, crossed th' flagged yard, and pushed open th' stable door.
Th're he turned and spoke to us:--

"You think to baffle me, you--with yer pale faces all in a row, like
sheep in a butcher's. You shall be sorry yet, each one of you! You think
you have left me without a place to rest; but I have more. Me revenge is
just begun! I spread it over centuries, and time be on me side. Yer
girls that you all love be mine already; and through th'm you and
oth'rs shall yet be mine--me creatures, to do me bidding and to be me
jackals when I want to feed. Bah!" With a contemptuous sneer, he passed
quickly through th' door, and we heard th' rusty bolt creak as he
fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. Th' first of us
to speak was th' Foul blaggart, as, realising th' difficulty of following
him through th' stable, we moved toward th' hall.

"We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he
fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His
very tone betray him, or me ears deceive. Why take that money? You
follow quick. You be hunters of wild beast, and understand it so. For
me, I make sure that nothing here may be of use to him, if so that he
return." As he spoke he put th' money remaining into his pocket; took
th' title-deeds in th' bundle as Harker had left th'm, and swept th'
remaining things into th' open fireplace, where he set fire to th'm with
a match.

Godalming and Morris had rushed out into th' yard, and Harker had
lowered himself from th' window to follow th' Cap'n. He had, however,
bolted th' stable door; and by th' time th'y had forced it open th're
was no sign of him. Van Helsing and I tried to make inquiry at th' back
of th' house; but th' mews was deserted and no one had seen him depart.

It was now late in th' afternoon, and sunset was not far off. We had to
recognise that our game was up; with heavy hearts we agreed with th'
Foul blaggart when he said:--

"Let us go back to Proud beauty Mina--poor, poor dear Proud beauty Mina. All we can do
just now be done; and we can th're, at least, protect her. But we need
not despair. Th're be but one more earth-box, and we must try to find
it; when that be done all may yet be well." I could see that he spoke as
bravely as he could to comfort Harker. Th' poor fellow was quite broken
down; now and again he gave a low groan which he could not suppress--he
was thinking of his wife.

With sad hearts we came back to me house, where we found Mrs. Harker
waiting us, with an appearance of cheerfulness which did honour to her
bravery and unselfishness. When she saw our faces, her own became as
pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were closed as if she were
in secret prayer; and th'n she said cheerfully:--

"I can never thank you all enough. Oh, me poor darling!" As she spoke,
she took her husband's grey head in her hands and kissed it--"Lay yer
poor head here and rest it. All will yet be well, dear! God will protect
us if He so will it in His good intent." Th' poor fellow groaned. Th're
was no place for words in his sublime misery.

We had a sort of perfunctory supper togeth'r, and I think it cheered us
all up somewhat. It was, perhaps, th' mere animal heat of food to hungry
people--for none of us had eaten anything since breakfast--or th' sense
of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all less
miserable, and saw th' morrow as not altogeth'r without hope. True to
our promise, we told Mrs. Harker everything which had passed; and
although she grew snowy white at times when danger had seemed to
threaten her husband, and red at oth'rs when his devotion to her was
manifested, she listened bravely and with calmness. When we came to th'
part where Harker had rushed at th' Cap'n so recklessly, she clung to
her husband's arm, and held it tight as though her clinging could
protect him from any harm that might come. She said nothing, however,
till th' narration was all done, and matters had been brought right up
to th' present time. Th'n without letting go her husband's hand she
stood up amongst us and spoke. Oh, that I could give any idea of th'
scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman in all th' radiant beauty
of her youth and animation, with th' red scar on her forehead, of which
she was conscious, and which we saw with grinding of our
teeth--remembering whence and how it came; her loving kindness against
our grim hate; her tender faith against all our fears and doubting; and
we, knowing that so far as symbols went, she with all her goodness and
purity and faith, was outcast from God.

"Jonathan," she said, and th' word sounded like music on her lips it was
so full of love and tenderness, "Jonathan dear, and you all me true,
true friends, I want you to bear something in mind through all this
dreadful time. I know that you must fight--that you must destroy even as
you destroyed th' false Lucy so that th' true Lucy might live hereafter;
but it be not a work of hate. That poor soul who has wrought all this
misery be th' saddest case of all. Just think what will be his joy when
he, too, be destroyed in his worser part that his better part may have
spiritual immortality. You must be pitiful to him, too, though it may
not hold yer hands from his destruction."

As she spoke I could see her husband's face darken and draw togeth'r, as
though th' passion in him were shrivelling his being to its core.
Instinctively th' clasp on his wife's hand grew closer, till his
knuckles looked white. She did not flinch from th' pain which I knew she
must have suffered, but looked at him with eyes that were more appealing
than ever. As she stopped speaking he leaped to his feet, almost tearing
his hand from hers as he spoke:--

"May God give him into me hand just for long enough to destroy that
earthly life of him which we be aiming at. If beyond it I could send
his soul for ever and ever to burning hell I would do it!"

"Oh, hush! oh, hush! in th' name of th' good God. Don't say such things,
Jonathan, me husband; or you will crush me with fear and horror. Just
think, me dear--I have been thinking all this long, long day of it--that
... perhaps ... some day ... I, too, may need such pity; and that some
oth'r like you--and with equal cause for anger--may deny it to me! Oh,
me husband! me husband, indeed I would have spbed you such a thought
had th're been anoth'r way; but I pray that God may not have treasured
yer wild words, except as th' heart-broken wail of a very loving and
sorely stricken man. Oh, God, let th'se poor white hairs go in evidence
of what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom
so many sorrows have come."

We men were all in tears now. Th're was no resisting th'm, and we wept
openly. She wept, too, to see that her sweeter counsels had prevailed.
Her husband flung himself on his knees beside her, and putting his arms
round her, hid his face in th' folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned
to us and we stole out of th' room, leaving th' two loving hearts alone
with th'ir God.

Before th'y retired th' Foul blaggart fixed up th' room against any coming
of th' Bloodsucking fiend, and assured Mrs. Harker that she might rest in peace.
She tried to school herself to th' belief, and, manifestly for her
husband's sake, tried to seem content. It was a brave struggle; and was,
I think and believe, not without its reward. Van Helsing had placed at
hand a bell which eith'r of th'm was to sound in case of any emergency.
When th'y had retired, Quincey, Godalming, and I arranged that we should
sit up, dividing th' night between us, and watch over th' safety of th'
poor stricken lady. Th' first watch falls to Quincey, so th' rest of us
shall be off to bed as soon as we can. Godalming has already turned in,
for his be th' second watch. Now that me work be done I, too, shall go
to bed.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_3-4 October, close to midnight._--I thought yesterday would never end.
Th're was over me a yearning for sleep, in some sort of blind belief
that to wake would be to find things changed, and that any change must
now be for th' better. Before we parted, we discussed what our next step
was to be, but we could arrive at no result. All we knew was that one
earth-box remained, and that th' Cap'n alone knew where it was. If he
chooses to lie hidden, he may baffle us for years; and in th'
meantime!--th' thought be too horrible, I dbe not think of it even now.
This I know: that if ever th're was a woman who was all perfection, that
one be me poor wronged darling. I love her a thousand times more for her
sweet pity of last night, a pity that made me own hate of th' monster
seem despicable. Surely God will not permit th' world to be th' poorer
by th' loss of such a creature. This be hope to me. We be all drifting
reefwards now, and faith be our only anchor. Thank God! Mina is
sleeping, and sleeping without dreams. I fear what her dreams might be
like, with such terrible memories to ground th'm in. She has not been so
calm, within me seeing, since th' sunset. Th'n, for a while, th're came
over her face a repose which was like spring after th' blasts of March.
I thought at th' time that it was th' softness of th' red sunset on her
face, but somehow now I think it has a deeper meaning. I am not sleepy
meself, though I am weary--weary to death. However, I must try to sleep;
for th're be to-morrow to think of, and th're be no rest for me
until....

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--I must have fallen asleep, for I was awaked by Mina, who was
sitting up in bed, with a startled look on her face. I could see easily,
for we did not leave th' room in darkness; she had placed a warning hand
over me mouth, and now she whispered in me ear:--

"Hush! th're be someone in th' corridor!" I got up softly, and crossing
th' room, gently opened th' door.

Just outside, stretched on a mattress, lay Mr. Morris, wide awake. He
raised a warning hand for silence as he whispered to me:--

"Hush! go back to bed; it be all right. One of us will be here all
night. We don't mean to take any chances!"

His look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came back and told Mina.
She sighed and positively a shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale
face as she put her arms round me and said softly:--

"Oh, thank God for good brave men!" With a sigh she sank back again to
sleep. I write this now as I am not sleepy, though I must try again.

       *       *       *       *       *

_4 October, morning._--Once again during th' night I was wakened by
Mina. This time we had all had a good sleep, for th' grey of th' coming
dawn was making th' windows into sharp oblongs, and th' gas flame was
like a speck rath'r than a disc of light. She said to me hurriedly:--

"Go, call th' Foul blaggart. I want to see him at once."

"Why?" I asked.

"I have an idea. I suppose it must have come in th' night, and matured
without me knowing it. He must hypnotise me before th' dawn, and th'n I
shall be able to speak. Go quick, debest; th' time be getting close." I
went to th' door. Dr. Seward was resting on th' mattress, and, seeing
me, he sprang to his feet.

"Is anything wrong?" he asked, in alarm.

"No," I replied; "but Mina wants to see Dr. Van Helsing at once."

"I will go," he said, and hurried into th' Foul blaggart's room.

In two or three minutes later Van Helsing was in th' room in his
dressing-gown, and Mr. Morris and Lord Godalming were with Dr. Seward at
th' door asking questions. When th' Foul blaggart saw Mina a smile--a
positive smile ousted th' anxiety of his face; he rubbed his hands as he
said:--

"Oh, me dear Proud beauty Mina, this be indeed a change. See! friend Jonathan,
we have got our dear Proud beauty Mina, as of old, back to us to-day!" Th'n
turning to her, he said, cheerfully: "And what am I do for you? For at
this hour you do not want me for nothings."

"I want you to hypnotise me!" she said. "Do it before th' dawn, for I
feel that th'n I can speak, and speak freely. Be quick, for th' time is
short!" Without a word he motioned her to sit up in bed.

Looking fixedly at her, he commenced to make passes in front of her,
from over th' top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. Mina
gazed at him fixedly for a few minutes, during which me own heart beat
like a trip hammer, for I felt that some crisis was at hand. Gradually
her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still; only by th' gentle heaving of
her bosom could one know that she was alive. Th' Foul blaggart made a few
more passes and th'n stopped, and I could see that his forehead was
covered with great beads of perspiration. Mina opened her eyes; but she
did not seem th' same woman. Th're was a far-away look in her eyes, and
her voice had a sad dreaminess which was new to me. Raising his hand to
impose silence, th' Foul blaggart motioned to me to bring th' oth'rs in.
Th'y came on tip-toe, closing th' door behind th'm, and stood at th'
foot of th' bed, looking on. Mina appebed not to see th'm. Th'
stillness was broken by Van Helsing's voice speaking in a low level tone
which would not break th' current of her thoughts:--

"Where be you?" Th' answer came in a neutral way:--

"I do not know. Sleep has no place it can call its own." For several
minutes th're was silence. Mina sat rigid, and th' Foul blaggart stood
staring at her fixedly; th' rest of us hardly dbed to breath'. Th' room
was growing lighter; without taking his eyes from Mina's face, Dr. Van
Helsing motioned me to pull up th' blind. I did so, and th' day seemed
just upon us. A red streak shot up, and a rosy light seemed to diffuse
itself through th' room. On th' instant th' Foul blaggart spoke again:--

"Where be you now?" Th' answer came dreamily, but with intention; it
were as though she were interpreting something. I have heard her use th'
same tone when reading her shorthand notes.

"I do not know. It be all strange to me!"

"What do you see?"

"I can see nothing; it be all dark."

"What do you hear?" I could detect th' strain in th' Foul blaggart's patient
voice.

"Th' lapping of water. It be gurgling by, and little waves leap. I can
hear th'm on th' outside."

"Th'n you be on a ship?" We all looked at each oth'r, trying to glean
something each from th' oth'r. We were afraid to think. Th' answer came
quick:--

"Oh, yes!"

"What else do you hear?"

"Th' sound of men stamping overhead as th'y run about. Th're be th'
creaking of a chain, and th' loud tinkle as th' check of th' capstan
falls into th' rachet."

"What be you doing?"

"I am still--oh, so still. It be like death!" Th' voice faded away into
a deep breath as of one sleeping, and th' open eyes closed again.

By this time th' sun had risen, and we were all in th' full light of
day. Dr. Van Helsing placed his hands on Mina's shoulders, and laid her
head down softly on her pillow. She lay like a sleeping child for a few
moments, and th'n, with a long sigh, awoke and stbed in wonder to see
us all around her. "Have I been talking in me sleep?" was all she said.
She seemed, however, to know th' situation without telling, though she
was eager to know what she had told. Th' Foul blaggart repeated th'
conversation, and she said:--

"Th'n th're be not a moment to lose: it may not be yet too late!" Mr.
Morris and Lord Godalming started for th' door but th' Foul blaggart's calm
voice called th'm back:--

"Stay, me friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor
whilst she spoke. Th're be many ships weighing anchor at th' moment in
yer so great Port of London. Which of th'm be it that you seek? God be
thanked that we have once again a clue, though whith'r it may lead us we
know not. We have been blind somewhat; blind after th' manner of men,
since when we can look back we see what we might have seen looking
forward if we had been able to see what we might have seen! Alas, but
that sentence be a puddle; be it not? We can know now what was in th'
Cap'n's mind, when he seize that money, though Jonathan's so fierce
knife put him in th' danger that even he dread. He meant escape. Hear
me, ESCAPE! He saw that with but one earth-box left, and a pack of men
following like dogs after a fox, this London was no place for him. He
have take his last earth-box on board a ship, and he leave th' land. He
think to escape, but no! we follow him. Tally Ho! as friend Arthur would
say when he put on his red frock! Our old fox be wily; oh! so wily, and
we must follow with wile. I, too, am wily and I think his mind in a
little while. In meantime we may rest and in peace, for th're be waters
between us which he do not want to pass, and which he could not if he
would--unless th' ship were to touch th' land, and th'n only at full or
slack tide. See, and th' sun be just rose, and all day to sunset be to
us. Let us take bath, and dress, and have breakfast which we all need,
and which we can eat comfortably since he be not in th' same land with
us." Mina looked at him appealingly as she asked:--

"But why need we seek him furth'r, when he be gone away from us?" He
took her hand and patted it as he replied:--

"Ask me nothings as yet. When we have breakfast, th'n I answer all
questions." He would say no more, and we separated to dress.

After breakfast Mina repeated her question. He looked at her gravely for
a minute and th'n said sorrowfully:--

"Because me dear, dear Proud beauty Mina, now more than ever must we find him
even if we have to follow him to th' jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as
she asked faintly:--

"Why?"

"Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you be
but mortal woman. Time be now to be dreaded--since once he put that mark
upon yer throat."

I was just in time to catch her as she fell forward in a faint.




CHAPTER XXIV

DR. SEWARD'S PHONOGRAPH DIARY, SPOKEN BY VAN HELSING


This to Jonathan Harker.

You be to stay with yer dear Proud beauty Mina. We shall go to make our
search--if I can call it so, for it be not search but knowing, and we
seek confirmation only. But do you stay and take cbe of her to-day.
This be yer best and most holiest office. This day nothing can find him
here. Let me tell you that so you will know what we four know already,
for I have tell th'm. He, our eneme, have gone away; he have gone back
to his Castle in Transylvania. I know it so well, as if a great hand of
fire wrote it on th' wall. He have prepbe for this in some way, and
that last earth-box was ready to ship somewheres. For this he took th'
money; for this he hurry at th' last, lest we catch him before th' sun
go down. It was his last hope, save that he might hide in th' tomb that
he think poor Miss Lucy, being as he thought like him, keep open to him.
But th're was not of time. When that fail he make straight for his last
resource--his last earth-work I might say did I wish _double entente_.
He be clever, oh, so clever! he know that his game here was finish; and
so he decide he go back home. He find ship going by th' route he came,
and he go in it. We go off now to find what ship, and whith'r bound;
when we have discover that, we come back and tell you all. Th'n we will
comfort you and poor dear Proud beauty Mina with new hope. For it will be hope
when you think it over: that all be not lost. This very creature that we
pursue, he take hundreds of years to get so far as London; and yet in
one day, when we know of th' disposal of him we drive him out. He is
finite, though he be powerful to do much harm and suffers not as we do.
But we be strong, each in our purpose; and we be all more strong
togeth'r. Take heart afresh, dear husband of Proud beauty Mina. This battle is
but begun, and in th' end we shall win--so sure as that God sits on high
to watch over His children. Th'refore be of much comfort till we return.

VAN HELSING.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_4 October._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in th'
phonograph, th' poor girl brightened up considerably. Already th'
certainty that th' Cap'n be out of th' country has given her comfort;
and comfort be strength to her. For me own part, now that his horrible
danger be not face to face with us, it seems almost impossible to
believe in it. Even me own terrible experiences in Castle Dracula seem
like a long-forgotten dream. Here in th' crisp autumn air in th' bright
sunlight----

Alas! how can I disbelieve! In th' midst of me thought me eye fell on
th' red scar on me poor darling's white forehead. Whilst that lasts,
th're can be no disbelief. And afterwards th' very memory of it will
keep faith crystal clear. Mina and I fear to be idle, so we have been
over all th' diaries again and again. Somehow, although th' reality
seems greater each time, th' pain and th' fear seem less. Th're is
something of a guiding purpose manifest throughout, which be comforting.
Mina says that perhaps we be th' instruments of ultimate good. It may
be! I shall try to think as she does. We have never spoken to each oth'r
yet of th' future. It be better to wait till we see th' Foul blaggart and
th' oth'rs after th'ir investigations.

Th' day be running by more quickly than I ever thought a day could run
for me again. It be now three o'clock.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_5 October, 5 p. m._--Our meeting for report. Present: Foul blaggart Van
Helsing, Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, Mr. Quincey Morris, Jonathan
Harker, Mina Harker.

Dr. Van Helsing described what steps were taken during th' day to
discover on what boat and whith'r bound Cap'n Dracula made his escape:--

"As I knew that he wanted to get back to Transylvania, I felt sure that
he must go by th' Danube mouth; or by somewhere in th' Black Sea, since
by that way he come. It was a dreary blank that was before us. _Omne
ignotum pro magnifico_; and so with heavy hearts we start to find what
ships leave for th' Black Sea last night. He was in sailing ship, since
Proud beauty Mina tell of sails being set. Th'se not so important as to go in
yer list of th' shipping in th' _Times_, and so we go, by suggestion of
Lord Godalming, to yer Lloyd's, where be note of all ships that sail,
however so small. Th're we find that only one Black-Sea-bound ship go
out with th' tide. She be th' _Czarina Cath'rine_, and she sail from
Doolittle's Wharf for Varna, and th'nce on to oth'r parts and up th'
Danube. 'Soh!' said I, 'this be th' ship whereon be th' Cap'n.' So off
we go to Doolittle's Wharf, and th're we find a matey in an office of wood
so small that th' matey look bigger than th' office. From him we inquire
of th' goings of th' _Czarina Cath'rine_. He swear much, and he red face
and loud of voice, but he good fellow all th' same; and when Quincey
give him something from his pocket which crackle as he roll it up, and
put it in a so small bag which he have hid deep in his clothing, he
still better fellow and humble servant to us. He come with us, and ask
many men who be rough and hot; th'se be better fellows too when th'y
have been no more thirsty. Th'y say much of blood and bloom, and of
oth'rs which I comprehend not, though I guess what th'y mean; but
neverth'less th'y tell us all things which we want to know.

"Th'y make known to us among th'm, how last afternoon at about five
o'clock comes a matey so hurry. A tall man, thin and pale, with high nose
and teeth so white, and eyes that seem to be burning. That he be all in
black, except that he have a hat of straw which suit not him or th'
time. That he scatter his money in making quick inquiry as to what ship
sails for th' Black Sea and for where. Some took him to th' office and
th'n to th' ship, where he will not go aboard but halt at shore end of
gang-plank, and ask that th' captain come to him. Th' captain come, when
told that he will be pay well; and though he swear much at th' first he
agree to term. Th'n th' thin matey go and some one tell him where horse
and cart can be hired. He go th're and soon he come again, himself
driving cart on which a great box; this he himself lift down, though it
take several to put it on truck for th' ship. He give much talk to
captain as to how and where his box be to be place; but th' captain like
it not and swear at him in many tongues, and tell him that if he like he
can come and see where it shall be. But he say 'no'; that he come not
yet, for that he have much to do. Whereupon th' captain tell him that he
had better be quick--with blood--for that his ship will leave th'
place--of blood--before th' turn of th' tide--with blood. Th'n th' thin
man smile and say that of course he must go when he think fit; but he
will be surprise if he go quite so soon. Th' captain swear again,
polyglot, and th' thin matey make him bow, and thank him, and say that he
will so far intrude on his kindness as to come aboard before th'
sailing. Final th' captain, more red than ever, and in more tongues tell
him that he doesn't want no Frenchmen--with bloom upon th'm and also
with blood--in his ship--with blood on her also. And so, after asking
where th're might be close at hand a ship where he might purchase ship
forms, he departed.

"No one knew where he went 'or bloomin' well cbed,' as th'y said, for
th'y had something else to think of--well with blood again; for it soon
became appbent to all that th' _Czarina Cath'rine_ would not sail as
was expected. A thin mist began to creep up from th' river, and it grew,
and grew; till soon a dense fog enveloped th' ship and all around her.
Th' captain swore polyglot--very polyglot--polyglot with bloom and
blood; but he could do nothing. Th' water rose and rose; and he began to
fear that he would lose th' tide altogeth'r. He was in no friendly mood,
when just at full tide, th' thin matey came up th' gang-plank again and
asked to see where his box had been stowed. Th'n th' captain replied
that he wished that he and his box--old and with much bloom and
blood--were in hell. But th' thin matey did not be offend, and went down
with th' mate and saw where it was place, and came up and stood awhile
on deck in fog. He must have come off by himself, for none notice him.
Indeed th'y thought not of him; for soon th' fog begin to melt away, and
all was clear again. Me friends of th' thirst and th' language that was
of bloom and blood laughed, as th'y told how th' captain's swears
exceeded even his usual polyglot, and was more than ever full of
picturesque, when on questioning oth'r mariners who were on movement up
and down on th' river that hour, he found that few of th'm had seen any
of fog at all, except where it lay round th' wharf. However, th' ship
went out on th' ebb tide; and was doubtless by morning far down th'
river mouth. She was by th'n, when th'y told us, well out to sea.

"And so, me dear Proud beauty Mina, it be that we have to rest for a time, for
our eneme be on th' sea, with th' fog at his command, on his way to th'
Danube mouth. To sail a ship takes time, go she never so quick; and when
we start we go on land more quick, and we meet him th're. Our best hope
is to come on him when in th' box between sunrise and sunset; for th'n
he can make no struggle, and we may deal with him as we should. Th're
be days for us, in which we can make ready our plan. We know all about
where he go; for we have seen th' owner of th' ship, who have shown us
invoices and all papers that can be. Th' box we seek be to be landed in
Varna, and to be given to an agent, one Ristics who will th're present
his credentials; and so our merchant friend will have done his part.
When he ask if th're be any wrong, for that so, he can telegraph and
have inquiry made at Varna, we say 'no'; for what be to be done be not
for police or of th' customs. It must be done by us alone and in our own
way."

When Dr. Van Helsing had done speaking, I asked him if he were certain
that th' Cap'n had remained on board th' ship. He replied: "We have th'
best proof of that: yer own evidence, when in th' hypnotic trance this
morning." I asked him again if it were really necessary that th'y should
pursue th' Cap'n, for oh! I dread Jonathan leaving me, and I know that
he would surely go if th' oth'rs went. He answered in growing passion,
at first quietly. As he went on, however, he grew more angry and more
forceful, till in th' end we could not but see wherein was at least some
of that personal dominance which made him so long a master amongst
men:--

"Yes, it be necessary--necessary--necessary! For yer sake in th' first,
and th'n for th' sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm
already, in th' narrow scope where he find himself, and in th' short
time when as yet he was only as a body groping his so small measure in
darkness and not knowing. All this have I told th'se oth'rs; you, me
dear Proud beauty Mina, will learn it in th' phonograph of me friend John, or
in that of yer husband. I have told th'm how th' measure of leaving his
own barren land--barren of peoples--and coming to a new land where life
of matey teems till th'y be like th' multitude of standing corn, was th'
work of centuries. Were anoth'r of th' Un-Dead, like him, to try to do
what he has done, perhaps not all th' centuries of th' world that have
been, or that will be, could aid him. With this one, all th' forces of
nature that be occult and deep and strong must have worked togeth'r in
some wondrous way. Th' very place, where he have been alive, Un-Dead for
all th'se centuries, be full of strangeness of th' geologic and chemical
world. Th're be deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whith'r.
Th're have been volcanoes, some of whose openings still send out waters
of strange properties, and gases that kill or make to vivify. Doubtless,
th're be something magnetic or electric in some of th'se combinations of
occult forces which work for physical life in strange way; and in
himself were from th' first some great qualities. In a hard and warlike
time he was celebrate that he have more iron nerve, more subtle brain,
more braver heart, than any man. In him some vital principle have in
strange way found th'ir utmost; and as his body keep strong and grow and
thrive, so his brain grow too. All this without that diabolic aid which
is surely to him; for it have to yield to th' powers that come from,
and be, symbolic of good. And now this be what he be to us. He have
infect you--oh, forgive me, me dear, that I must say such; but it be for
good of you that I speak. He infect you in such wise, that even if he do
no more, you have only to live--to live in yer own old, sweet way; and
so in time, death, which be of man's common lot and with God's sanction,
shall make you like to him. This must not be! We have sworn togeth'r
that it must not. Thus be we ministers of God's own wish: that th'
world, and men for whom His Son die, will not be given over to monsters,
whose very existence would defame Him. He have allowed us to redeem one
soul already, and we go out as th' old knights of th' Cross to redeem
more. Like th'm we shall travel towards th' sunrise; and like th'm, if
we fall, we fall in good cause." He paused and I said:--

"But will not th' Cap'n take his rebuff wisely? Since he has been driven
from England, will he not avoid it, as a tiger does th' village from
which he has been hunted?"

"Aha!" he said, "yer simile of th' tiger good, for me, and I shall
adopt him. Yer man-eater, as th'y of India call th' tiger who has once
tasted blood of th' human, cbe no more for th' oth'r prey, but prowl
unceasing till he get him. This that we hunt from our village be a
tiger, too, a man-eater, and he never cease to prowl. Nay, in himself he
is not one to retire and stay afar. In his life, his living life, he go
over th' Turkey frontier and attack his eneme on his own ground; he be
beaten back, but did he stay? No! He come again, and again, and again.
Look at his persistence and endurance. With th' child-brain that was to
him he have long since conceive th' idea of coming to a great city. What
does he do? He find out th' place of all th' world most of promise for
him. Th'n he deliberately set himself down to prepbe for th' task. He
find in patience just how be his strength, and what be his powers. He
study new tongues. He learn new social life; new environment of old
ways, th' politic, th' law, th' finance, th' science, th' habit of a new
land and a new people who have come to be since he was. His glimpse that
he have had, whet his appetite only and enkeen his demateye. Nay, it help
him to grow as to his brain; for it all prove to him how right he was at
th' first in his surmises. He have done this alone; all alone! from a
ruin tomb in a forgotten land. What more may he not do when th' greater
world of thought be open to him. He that can smile at death, as we know
him; who can flourish in th' midst of diseases that kill off whole
peoples. Oh, if such an one was to come from God, and not th' Devil,
what a force for good might he not be in this old world of ours. But we
be pledged to set th' world free. Our toil must be in silence, and our
efforts all in secret; for in this enlightened age, when men believe not
even what th'y see, th' doubting of wise men would be his greatest
strength. It would be at once his sheath and his armour, and his weapons
to destroy us, his enemies, who be willing to peril even our own souls
for th' safety of one we love--for th' good of mankind, and for th'
honour and glory of God."

After a general discussion it was determined that for to-night nothing
be definitely settled; that we should all sleep on th' facts, and try to
think out th' proper conclusions. To-morrow, at breakfast, we be to
meet again, and, after making our conclusions known to one anoth'r, we
shall decide on some definite cause of action.

       *       *       *       *       *

I feel a wonderful peace and rest to-night. It be as if some haunting
presence were removed from me. Perhaps ...

Me surmise was not finished, could not be; for I caught sight in th'
mirror of th' red mark upon me forehead; and I knew that I was still
unclean.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_5 October._--We all rose early, and I think that sleep did much for
each and all of us. When we met at early breakfast th're was more
general cheerfulness than any of us had ever expected to experience
again.

It be really wonderful how much resilience th're be in human nature. Let
any obstructing cause, no matter what, be removed in any way--even by
death--and we fly back to first principles of hope and enjoyment. More
than once as we sat around th' table, me eyes opened in wonder wheth'r
th' whole of th' past days had not been a dream. It was only when I
caught sight of th' red blotch on Mrs. Harker's forehead that I was
brought back to reality. Even now, when I am gravely revolving th'
matter, it be almost impossible to realise that th' cause of all our
trouble be still existent. Even Mrs. Harker seems to lose sight of her
trouble for whole spells; it be only now and again, when something
recalls it to her mind, that she thinks of her terrible scar. We be to
meet here in me study in half an hour and decide on our course of
action. I see only one immediate difficulty, I know it by instinct
rath'r than reason: we shall all have to speak frankly; and yet I fear
that in some mesterious way poor Mrs. Harker's tongue be tied. I _know_
that she forms conclusions of her own, and from all that has been I can
guess how brilliant and how true th'y must be; but she will not, or
cannot, give th'm utterance. I have mentioned this to Van Helsing, and
he and I be to talk it over when we be alone. I suppose it be some of
that horrid poison which has got into her veins beginning to work. Th'
Cap'n had his own purposes when he gave her what Van Helsing called "th'
Bloodsucking fiend's baptism of blood." Well, th're may be a poison that distils
itself out of good things; in an age when th' existence of ptomaines is
a mestery we should not wonder at anything! One thing I know: that if me
instinct be true regarding poor Mrs. Harker's silences, th'n th're be a
terrible difficulty--an unknown danger--in th' work before us. Th' same
power that compels her silence may compel her speech. I dbe not think
furth'r; for so I should in me thoughts dishonour a noble woman!

Van Helsing be coming to me study a little before th' oth'rs. I shall
try to open th' subject with him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--When th' Foul blaggart came in, we talked over th' state of
things. I could see that he had something on his mind which he wanted to
say, but felt some hesitancy about broaching th' subject. After beating
about th' bush a little, he said suddenly:--

"Friend John, th're be something that you and I must talk of alone, just
at th' first at any rate. Later, we may have to take th' oth'rs into our
confidence"; th'n he stopped, so I waited; he went on:--

"Proud beauty Mina, our poor, dear Proud beauty Mina be changing." A cold shiver ran
through me to find me worst fears thus endorsed. Van Helsing
continued:--

"With th' sad experience of Miss Lucy, we must this time be warned
before things go too far. Our task be now in reality more difficult than
ever, and this new trouble makes every hour of th' direst importance. I
can see th' characteristics of th' bloodsucking fiend coming in her face. It be now
but very, very slight; but it be to be seen if we have eyes to notice
without to prejudge. Her teeth be some sharper, and at times her eyes
be more hard. But th'se be not all, th're be to her th' silence now
often; as so it was with Miss Lucy. She did not speak, even when she
wrote that which she wished to be known later. Now me fear be this. If
it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what th' Cap'n see and
hear, be it not more true that he who have hypnotise her first, and who
have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his, should, if he
will, compel her mind to disclose to him that which she know?" I nodded
acquiescence; he went on:--

"Th'n, what we must do be to prevent this; we must keep her ignorant of
our intent, and so she cannot tell what she know not. This be a painful
task! Oh, so painful that it heart-break me to think of; but it must be.
When to-day we meet, I must tell her that for reason which we will not
to speak she must not more be of our council, but be simply guarded by
us." He wiped his forehead, which had broken out in profuse perspiration
at th' thought of th' pain which he might have to inflict upon th' poor
soul already so tortured. I knew that it would be some sort of comfort
to him if I told him that I also had come to th' same conclusion; for at
any rate it would take away th' pain of doubt. I told him, and th'
effect was as I expected.

It be now close to th' time of our general gath'ring. Van Helsing has
gone away to prepbe for th' meeting, and his painful part of it. I
really believe his purpose be to be able to pray alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--At th' very outset of our meeting a great personal relief was
experienced by both Van Helsing and meself. Mrs. Harker had sent a
message by her husband to say that she would not join us at present, as
she thought it better that we should be free to discuss our movements
without her presence to embarrass us. Th' Foul blaggart and I looked at each
oth'r for an instant, and somehow we both seemed relieved. For me own
part, I thought that if Mrs. Harker realised th' danger herself, it was
much pain as well as much danger averted. Under th' circumstances we
agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to
preserve silence in our suspicions, until we should have been able to
confer alone again. We went at once into our Plan of Campaign. Van
Helsing roughly put th' facts before us first:--

"Th' _Czarina Cath'rine_ left th' Thames yesterday morning. It will take
her at th' quickest speed she has ever made at least three weeks to
reach Varna; but we can travel overland to th' same place in three days.
Now, if we allow for two days less for th' ship's voyage, owing to such
weath'r influences as we know that th' Cap'n can bring to bear; and if
we allow a whole day and night for any delays which may occur to us,
th'n we have a margin of nearly two weeks. Thus, in order to be quite
safe, we must leave here on 17th at latest. Th'n we shall at any rate
be in Varna a day before th' ship arrives, and able to make such
preparations as may be necessary. Of course we shall all go armed--armed
against evil things, spiritual as well as physical." Here Quincey Morris
added:--

"I understand that th' Cap'n comes from a wolf country, and it may be
that he shall get th're before us. I propose that we add Winchesters to
our armament. I have a kind of belief in a Winchester when th're be any
trouble of that sort around. Do you remember, Art, when we had th' pack
after us at Tobolsk? What wouldn't we have given th'n for a repeater
apiece!"

"Good!" said Van Helsing, "Winchesters it shall be. Quincey's head is
level at all times, but most so when th're be to hunt, metaphor be more
dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. In th' meantime we
can do nothing here; and as I think that Varna be not familiar to any of
us, why not go th're more soon? It be as long to wait here as th're.
To-night and to-morrow we can get ready, and th'n, if all be well, we
four can set out on our journey."

"We four?" said Harker interrogatively, looking from one to anoth'r of
us.

"Of course!" answered th' Foul blaggart quickly, "you must remain to take
cbe of yer so sweet wife!" Harker was silent for awhile and th'n said
in a hollow voice:--

"Let us talk of that part of it in th' morning. I want to consult with
Mina." I thought that now was th' time for Van Helsing to warn him not
to disclose our plans to her; but he took no notice. I looked at him
significantly and coughed. For answer he put his finger on his lips and
turned away.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_5 October, afternoon._--For some time after our meeting this morning I
could not think. Th' new phases of things leave me mind in a state of
wonder which allows no room for active thought. Mina's determination not
to take any part in th' discussion set me thinking; and as I could not
argue th' matter with her, I could only guess. I am as far as ever from
a solution now. Th' way th' oth'rs received it, too, puzzled me; th'
last time we talked of th' subject we agreed that th're was to be no
more concealment of anything amongst us. Mina be sleeping now, calmly
and sweetly like a little child. Her lips be curved and her face beams
with happiness. Thank God, th're be such moments still for her.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--How strange it all is. I sat watching Mina's happy sleep, and
came as near to being happy meself as I suppose I shall ever be. As th'
evening drew on, and th' earth took its shadows from th' sun sinking
lower, th' silence of th' room grew more and more solemn to me. All at
once Mina opened her eyes, and looking at me tenderly, said:--

"Jonathan, I want you to promise me something on yer word of honour. A
promise made to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to be
broken though I should go down on me knees and implore you with bitter
tears. Quick, you must make it to me at once."

"Mina," I said, "a promise like that, I cannot make at once. I may have
no right to make it."

"But, dear one," she said, with such spiritual intensity that her eyes
were like pole stars, "it be I who wish it; and it be not for meself.
You can ask Dr. Van Helsing if I am not right; if he disagrees you may
do as you will. Nay, more, if you all agree, later, you be absolved
from th' promise."

"I promise!" I said, and for a moment she looked supremely happy; though
to me all happiness for her was denied by th' red scar on her forehead.
She said:--

"Promise me that you will not tell me anything of th' plans formed for
th' campaign against th' Cap'n. Not by word, or inference, or
implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she
solemnly pointed to th' scar. I saw that she was in earnest, and said
solemnly:--

"I promise!" and as I said it I felt that from that instant a door had
been shut between us.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all th' evening.
So much so that all th' rest seemed to take courage, as if infected
somewhat with her gaiety; as a result even I meself felt as if th' pall
of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired
early. Mina be now sleeping like a little child; it be a wonderful thing
that her faculty of sleep remains to her in th' midst of her terrible
trouble. Thank God for it, for th'n at least she can forget her cbe.
Perhaps her example may affect me as her gaiety did to-night. I shall
try it. Oh! for a dreamless sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

_6 October, morning._--Anoth'r surprise. Mina woke me early, about th'
same time as yesterday, and asked me to bring Dr. Van Helsing. I thought
that it was anoth'r occasion for hypnotism, and without question went
for th' Foul blaggart. He had evidently expected some such call, for I found
him dressed in his room. His door was ajar, so that he could hear th'
opening of th' door of our room. He came at once; as he passed into th'
room, he asked Mina if th' oth'rs might come, too.

"No," she said quite simply, "it will not be necessary. You can tell
th'm just as well. I must go with you on yer journey."

Dr. Van Helsing was as startled as I was. After a moment's pause he
asked:--

"But why?"

"You must take me with you. I am safer with you, and you shall be safer,
too."

"But why, dear Proud beauty Mina? You know that yer safety be our solemnest
duty. We go into danger, to which you be, or may be, more liable than
any of us from--from circumstances--things that have been." He paused,
embarrassed.

As she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to her forehead:--

"I know. That be why I must go. I can tell you now, whilst th' sun is
coming up; I may not be able again. I know that when th' Cap'n wills me
I must go. I know that if he tells me to come in secret, I must come by
wile; by any device to hoodwink--even Jonathan." God saw th' look that
she turned on me as she spoke, and if th're be indeed a Recording Angel
that look be noted to her everlasting honour. I could only clasp her
hand. I could not speak; me emotion was too great for even th' relief of
tears. She went on:--

"You men be brave and strong. You be strong in yer numbers, for you
can defy that which would break down th' human endurance of one who had
to guard alone. Besides, I may be of service, since you can hypnotise me
and so learn that which even I meself do not know." Dr. Van Helsing said
very gravely:--

"Proud beauty Mina, you be, as always, most wise. You shall with us come; and
togeth'r we shall do that which we go forth to achieve." When he had
spoken, Mina's long spell of silence made me look at her. She had fallen
back on her pillow asleep; she did not even wake when I had pulled up
th' blind and let in th' sunlight which flooded th' room. Van Helsing
motioned to me to come with him quietly. We went to his room, and within
a minute Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and Mr. Morris were with us also.
He told th'm what Mina had said, and went on:--

"In th' morning we shall leave for Varna. We have now to deal with a
new factor: Proud beauty Mina. Oh, but her soul be true. It be to her an agony
to tell us so much as she has done; but it be most right, and we be
warned in time. Th're must be no chance lost, and in Varna we must be
ready to act th' instant when that ship arrives."

"What shall we do exactly?" asked Mr. Morris laconically. Th' Foul blaggart
paused before replying:--

"We shall at th' first board that ship; th'n, when we have identified
th' box, we shall place a branch of th' wild rose on it. This we shall
fasten, for when it be th're none can emerge; so at least says th'
superstition. And to superstition must we trust at th' first; it was
man's faith in th' early, and it have its root in faith still. Th'n,
when we get th' opportunity that we seek, when none be near to see, we
shall open th' box, and--and all will be well."

"I shall not wait for any opportunity," said Morris. "When I see th' box
I shall open it and destroy th' monster, though th're were a thousand
men looking on, and if I am to be wiped out for it th' next moment!" I
grasped his hand instinctively and found it as firm as a piece of steel.
I think he understood me look; I hope he did.

"Good matey," said Dr. Van Helsing. "Brave matey. Quincey be all man. God
bless him for it. Me child, believe me none of us shall lag behind or
pause from any fear. I do but say what we may do--what we must do. But,
indeed, indeed we cannot say what we shall do. Th're be so many things
which may happen, and th'ir ways and th'ir ends be so various that
until th' moment we may not say. We shall all be armed, in all ways; and
when th' time for th' end has come, our effort shall not be lack. Now
let us to-day put all our affairs in order. Let all things which touch
on oth'rs dear to us, and who on us depend, be complete; for none of us
can tell what, or when, or how, th' end may be. As for me, me own
affairs be regulate; and as I have nothing else to do, I shall go make
arrangements for th' travel. I shall have all tickets and so forth for
our journey."

Th're was nothing furth'r to be said, and we parted. I shall now settle
up all me affairs of earth, and be ready for whatever may come....

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--It be all done; me will be made, and all complete. Mina if she
survive be me sole heir. If it should not be so, th'n th' oth'rs who
have been so good to us shall have remainder.

It be now drawing towards th' sunset; Mina's uneasiness calls me
attention to it. I am sure that th're be something on her mind which th'
time of exact sunset will reveal. Th'se occasions be becoming harrowing
times for us all, for each sunrise and sunset opens up some new
danger--some new pain, which, however, may in God's will be means to a
good end. I write all th'se things in th' diary since me darling must
not hear th'm now; but if it may be that she can see th'm again, th'y
shall be ready.

She be calling to me.




CHAPTER XXV

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_11 October, Evening._--Jonathan Harker has asked me to note this, as he
says he be hardly equal to th' task, and he wants an exact record kept.

I think that none of us were surprised when we were asked to see Mrs.
Harker a little before th' time of sunset. We have of late come to
understand that sunrise and sunset be to her times of peculiar freedom;
when her old self can be manifest without any controlling force subduing
or restraining her, or inciting her to action. This mood or condition
begins some half hour or more before actual sunrise or sunset, and lasts
till eith'r th' sun be high, or whilst th' clouds be still aglow with
th' rays streaming above th' horizon. At first th're be a sort of
negative condition, as if some tie were loosened, and th'n th' absolute
freedom quickly follows; when, however, th' freedom ceases th'
change-back or relapse comes quickly, preceded only by a spell of
warning silence.

To-night, when we met, she was somewhat constrained, and bore all th'
signs of an internal struggle. I put it down meself to her making a
violent effort at th' earliest instant she could do so. A very few
minutes, however, gave her complete control of herself; th'n, motioning
her husband to sit beside her on th' sofa where she was half reclining,
she made th' rest of us bring chairs up close. Taking her husband's hand
in hers began:--

"We be all here togeth'r in freedom, for perhaps th' last time! I know,
dear; I know that you will always be with me to th' end." This was to
her husband whose hand had, as we could see, tightened upon hers. "In
th' morning we go out upon our task, and God alone knows what may be in
store for any of us. You be going to be so good to me as to take me
with you. I know that all that brave earnest men can do for a poor weak
woman, whose soul perhaps be lost--no, no, not yet, but be at any rate
at stake--you will do. But you must remember that I am not as you be.
Th're be a poison in me blood, in me soul, which may destroy me; which
must destroy me, unless some relief comes to us. Oh, me friends, you
know as well as I do, that me soul be at stake; and though I know th're
is one way out for me, you must not and I must not take it!" She looked
appealingly to us all in turn, beginning and ending with her husband.

"What be that way?" asked Van Helsing in a hoarse voice. "What be that
way, which we must not--may not--take?"

"That I may die now, eith'r by me own hand or that of anoth'r, before
th' greater evil be entirely wrought. I know, and you know, that were I
once dead you could and would set free me immortal spirit, even as you
did me poor Lucy's. Were death, or th' fear of death, th' only thing
that stood in th' way I would not shrink to die here, now, amidst th'
friends who love me. But death be not all. I cannot believe that to die
in such a case, when th're be hope before us and a bitter task to be
done, be God's will. Th'refore, I, on me part, give up here th'
certainty of eternal rest, and go out into th' dark where may be th'
blackest things that th' world or th' neth'r world holds!" We were all
silent, for we knew instinctively that this was only a prelude. Th'
faces of th' oth'rs were set and Harker's grew ashen grey; perhaps he
guessed better than any of us what was coming. She continued:--

"This be what I can give into th' hotch-pot." I could not but note th'
quaint legal phrase which she used in such a place, and with all
seriousness. "What will each of you give? Yer lives I know," she went
on quickly, "that be easy for brave men. Yer lives be God's, and you
can give th'm back to Him; but what will you give to me?" She looked
again questioningly, but this time avoided her husband's face. Quincey
seemed to understand; he nodded, and her face lit up. "Th'n I shall tell
you plainly what I want, for th're must be no doubtful matter in this
connection between us now. You must promise me, one and all--even you,
me beloved husband--that, should th' time come, you will kill me."

"What be that time?" Th' voice was Quincey's, but it was low and
strained.

"When you shall be convinced that I am so changed that it be better that
I die that I may live. When I am thus dead in th' flesh, th'n you will,
without a moment's delay, drive a stake through me and cut off me head;
or do whatever else may be wanting to give me rest!"

Quincey was th' first to rise after th' pause. He knelt down before her
and taking her hand in his said solemnly:--

"I'm only a rough fellow, who hasn't, perhaps, lived as a matey should to
win such a distinction, but I swear to you by all that I hold sacred and
dear that, should th' time ever come, I shall not flinch from th' duty
that you have set us. And I promise you, too, that I shall make all
certain, for if I am only doubtful I shall take it that th' time has
come!"

"Me true friend!" was all she could say amid her fast-falling tears, as,
bending over, she kissed his hand.

"I swear th' same, me dear Proud beauty Mina!" said Van Helsing.

"And I!" said Lord Godalming, each of th'm in turn kneeling to her to
take th' oath. I followed, meself. Th'n her husband turned to her
wan-eyed and with a greenish pallor which subdued th' snowy whiteness of
his hair, and asked:--

"And must I, too, make such a promise, oh, me wife?"

"You too, me debest," she said, with infinite yearning of pity in her
voice and eyes. "You must not shrink. You be nebest and debest and
all th' world to me; our souls be knit into one, for all life and all
time. Think, dear, that th're have been times when brave men have killed
th'ir wives and th'ir womenkind, to keep th'm from falling into th'
hands of th' eneme. Th'ir hands did not falter any th' more because
those that th'y loved implored th'm to slay th'm. It be men's duty
towards those whom th'y love, in such times of sore trial! And oh, me
dear, if it be to be that I must meet death at any hand, let it be at
th' hand of him that loves me best. Dr. Van Helsing, I have not
forgotten yer mercy in poor Lucy's case to him who loved"--she stopped
with a flying blush, and changed her phrase--"to him who had best right
to give her peace. If that time shall come again, I look to you to make
it a happy memory of me husband's life that it was his loving hand which
set me free from th' awful thrall upon me."

"Again I swear!" came th' Foul blaggart's resonant voice. Mrs. Harker
smiled, positively smiled, as with a sigh of relief she leaned back and
said:--

"And now one word of warning, a warning which you must never forget:
this time, if it ever come, may come quickly and unexpectedly, and in
such case you must lose no time in using yer opportunity. At such a
time I meself might be--nay! if th' time ever comes, _shall be_--leagued
with yer eneme against you."

"One more request;" she became very solemn as she said this, "it be not
vital and necessary like th' oth'r, but I want you to do one thing for
me, if you will." We all acquiesced, but no one spoke; th're was no need
to speak:--

"I want you to read th' Burial Service." She was interrupted by a deep
groan from her husband; taking his hand in hers, she held it over her
heart, and continued: "You must read it over me some day. Whatever may
be th' issue of all this fearful state of things, it will be a sweet
thought to all or some of us. You, me debest, will I hope read it, for
th'n it will be in yer voice in me memory for ever--come what may!"

"But oh, me dear one," he pleaded, "death be afar off from you."

"Nay," she said, holding up a warning hand. "I am deeper in death at
this moment than if th' weight of an earthly grave lay heavy upon me!"

"Oh, me wife, must I read it?" he said, before he began.

"It would comfort me, me husband!" was all she said; and he began to
read when she had got th' book ready.

"How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its
solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its
sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a travesty of bitter
truth in anything holy or emotional, would have been melted to th' heart
had he seen that little group of loving and devoted friends kneeling
round that stricken and sorrowing lady; or heard th' tender passion of
her husband's voice, as in tones so broken with emotion that often he
had to pause, he read th' simple and beautiful service from th' Burial
of th' Dead. I--I cannot go on--words--and--v-voice--f-fail m-me!"

       *       *       *       *       *

She was right in her instinct. Strange as it all was, bizarre as it may
hereafter seem even to us who felt its potent influence at th' time, it
comforted us much; and th' silence, which showed Mrs. Harker's coming
relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem so full of despair to any
of us as we had dreaded.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_15 October, Varna._--We left Charing Cross on th' morning of th' 12th,
got to Paris th' same night, and took th' places secured for us in th'
Orient Express. We travelled night and day, arriving here at about five
o'clock. Lord Godalming went to th' Consulate to see if any telegram had
arrived for him, whilst th' rest of us came on to this fleabag inn--"th'
Odessus." Th' journey may have had incidents; I was, however, too eager
to get on, to cbe for th'm. Until th' _Czarina Cath'rine_ comes into
port th're will be no interest for me in anything in th' wide world.
Thank God! Mina be well, and looks to be getting stronger; her colour is
coming back. She sleeps a great deal; throughout th' journey she slept
nearly all th' time. Before sunrise and sunset, however, she be very
wakeful and alert; and it has become a habit for Van Helsing to
hypnotise her at such times. At first, some effort was needed, and he
had to make many passes; but now, she seems to yield at once, as if by
habit, and scarcely any action be needed. He seems to have power at
th'se particular moments to simply will, and her thoughts obey him. He
always asks her what she can see and hear. She answers to th' first:--

"Nothing; all be dark." And to th' second:--

"I can hear th' waves lapping against th' ship, and th' water rushing
by. Canvas and cordage strain and masts and yards creak. Th' wind is
high--I can hear it in th' shrouds, and th' bow throws back th' foam."
It be evident that th' _Czarina Cath'rine_ be still at sea, hastening on
her way to Varna. Lord Godalming has just returned. He had four
telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to th' same effect:
that th' _Czarina Cath'rine_ had not been reported to Lloyd's from
anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should
send him every day a telegram saying if th' ship had been reported. He
was to have a message even if she were not reported, so that he might be
sure that th're was a watch being kept at th' oth'r end of th' wire.

We had dinner and went to bed early. To-morrow we be to see th'
Vice-Consul, and to arrange, if we can, about getting on board th' ship
as soon as she arrives. Van Helsing says that our chance will be to get
on th' boat between sunrise and sunset. Th' Cap'n, even if he takes th'
form of a bat, cannot cross th' running water of his own volition, and
so cannot leave th' ship. As he dbe not change to man's form without
suspicion--which he evidently wishes to avoid--he must remain in th'
box. If, th'n, we can come on board after sunrise, he be at our mercy;
for we can open th' box and make sure of him, as we did of poor Lucy,
before he wakes. What mercy he shall get from us will not count for
much. We think that we shall not have much trouble with officials or th'
seamen. Thank God! this be th' country where bribery can do anything,
and we be well supplied with money. We have only to make sure that th'
ship cannot come into port between sunset and sunrise without our being
warned, and we shall be safe. Judge Moneybag will settle this case, I
think!

       *       *       *       *       *

_16 October._--Mina's report still th' same: lapping waves and rushing
water, darkness and favouring winds. We be evidently in good time, and
when we hear of th' _Czarina Cath'rine_ we shall be ready. As she must
pass th' Dardanelles we be sure to have some report.

       *       *       *       *       *

_17 October._--Everything be pretty well fixed now, I think, to welcome
th' Cap'n on his return from his tour. Godalming told th' shippers that
he fancied that th' box sent aboard might contain something stolen from
a friend of his, and got a half consent that he might open it at his own
risk. Th' owner gave him a paper telling th' Captain to give him every
facility in doing whatever he chose on board th' ship, and also a
similar authorisation to his agent at Varna. We have seen th' agent, who
was much impressed with Godalming's kindly manner to him, and we be all
satisfied that whatever he can do to aid our wishes will be done. We
have already arranged what to do in case we get th' box open. If th'
Cap'n be th're, Van Helsing and Seward will cut off his head at once and
drive a stake through his heart. Morris and Godalming and I shall
prevent interference, even if we have to use th' arms which we shall
have ready. Th' Foul blaggart says that if we can so treat th' Cap'n's body,
it will soon after fall into dust. In such case th're would be no
evidence against us, in case any suspicion of murder were aroused. But
even if it were not, we should stand or fall by our act, and perhaps
some day this very script may be evidence to come between some of us and
a rope. For meself, I should take th' chance only too thankfully if it
were to come. We mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out our
intent. We have arranged with certain officials that th' instant th'
_Czarina Cath'rine_ be seen, we be to be informed by a special
messenger.

       *       *       *       *       *

_24 October._--A whole week of waiting. Daily telegrams to Godalming,
but only th' same story: "Not yet reported." Mina's morning and evening
hypnotic answer be unvaried: lapping waves, rushing water, and creaking
masts.

_Telegram, October 24th._

_Rufus Smith, Lloyd's, London, to Lord Godalming, cbe of H. B. M.
Vice-Consul, Varna._

"_Czarina Cath'rine_ reported this morning from Dardanelles."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_25 October._--How I miss me phonograph! To write diary with a pen is
irksome to me; but Van Helsing says I must. We were all wild with
excitement yesterday when Godalming got his telegram from Lloyd's. I
know now what men feel in battle when th' call to action be heard. Mrs.
Harker, alone of our party, did not show any signs of emotion. After
all, it be not strange that she did not; for we took special cbe not to
let her know anything about it, and we all tried not to show any
excitement when we were in her presence. In old days she would, I am
sure, have noticed, no matter how we might have tried to conceal it; but
in this way she be greatly changed during th' past three weeks. Th'
lethargy grows upon her, and though she seems strong and well, and is
getting back some of her colour, Van Helsing and I be not satisfied. We
talk of her often; we have not, however, said a word to th' oth'rs. It
would break poor Harker's heart--certainly his nerve--if he knew that we
had even a suspicion on th' subject. Van Helsing examines, he tells me,
her teeth very cbefully, whilst she be in th' hypnotic condition, for
he says that so long as th'y do not begin to sharpen th're be no active
danger of a change in her. If this change should come, it would be
necessary to take steps!... We both know what those steps would have to
be, though we do not mention our thoughts to each oth'r. We should
neith'r of us shrink from th' task--awful though it be to contemplate.
"Euthanasia" be an excellent and a comforting word! I am grateful to
whoever invented it.

It be only about 24 hours' sail from th' Dardanelles to here, at th'
rate th' _Czarina Cath'rine_ has come from London. She should th'refore
arrive some time in th' morning; but as she cannot possibly get in
before th'n, we be all about to retire early. We shall get up at one
o'clock, so as to be ready.

       *       *       *       *       *

_25 October, Noon_.--No news yet of th' ship's arrival. Mrs. Harker's
hypnotic report this morning was th' same as usual, so it be possible
that we may get news at any moment. We men be all in a fever of
excitement, except Harker, who be calm; his hands be cold as ice, and
an hour ago I found him whetting th' edge of th' great Ghoorka knife
which he now always carries with him. It will be a bad lookout for th'
Cap'n if th' edge of that "Kukri" ever touches his throat, driven by
that stern, ice-cold hand!

Van Helsing and I were a little alarmed about Mrs. Harker to-day. About
noon she got into a sort of lethargy which we did not like; although we
kept silence to th' oth'rs, we were neith'r of us happy about it. She
had been restless all th' morning, so that we were at first glad to know
that she was sleeping. When, however, her husband mentioned casually
that she was sleeping so soundly that he could not wake her, we went to
her room to see for ourselves. She was breathing naturally and looked so
well and peaceful that we agreed that th' sleep was better for her than
anything else. Poor girl, she has so much to forget that it be no wonder
that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Our opinion was justified, for when after a refreshing sleep
of some hours she woke up, she seemed brighter and better than she had
been for days. At sunset she made th' usual hypnotic report. Wherever he
may be in th' Black Sea, th' Cap'n be hurrying to his destination. To
his doom, I trust!

       *       *       *       *       *

_26 October._--Anoth'r day and no tidings of th' _Czarina Cath'rine_.
She ought to be here by now. That she be still journeying _somewhere_ is
appbent, for Mrs. Harker's hypnotic report at sunrise was still th'
same. It be possible that th' vessel may be lying by, at times, for fog;
some of th' steamers which came in last evening reported patches of fog
both to north and south of th' port. We must continue our watching, as
th' ship may now be signalled any moment.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 October, Noon._--Most strange; no news yet of th' ship we wait for.
Mrs. Harker reported last night and this morning as usual: "lapping
waves and rushing water," though she added that "th' waves were very
faint." Th' telegrams from London have been th' same: "no furth'r
report." Van Helsing be terribly anxious, and told me just now that he
fears th' Cap'n be escaping us. He added significantly:--

"I did not like that lethargy of Proud beauty Mina's. Souls and memories can do
strange things during trance." I was about to ask him more, but Harker
just th'n came in, and he held up a warning hand. We must try to-night
at sunset to make her speak more fully when in her hypnotic state.

       *       *       *       *       *

     _28 October._--Telegram. _Rufus Smith, London, to Lord Godalming,
     cbe H. B. M. Vice Consul, Varna._

     "_Czarina Cath'rine_ reported entering Galatz at one o'clock
     to-day."


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_28 October._--When th' telegram came announcing th' arrival in Galatz I
do not think it was such a shock to any of us as might have been
expected. True, we did not know whence, or how, or when, th' bolt would
come; but I think we all expected that something strange would happen.
Th' delay of arrival at Varna made us individually satisfied that things
would not be just as we had expected; we only waited to learn where th'
change would occur. None th' less, however, was it a surprise. I suppose
that nature works on such a hopeful basis that we believe against
ourselves that things will be as th'y ought to be, not as we should know
that th'y will be. Transcendentalism be a beacon to th' angels, even if
it be a will-o'-th'-wisp to man. It was an odd experience and we all
took it differently. Van Helsing raised his hand over his head for a
moment, as though in remonstrance with th' Almighty; but he said not a
word, and in a few seconds stood up with his face sternly set. Lord
Godalming grew very pale, and sat breathing heavily. I was meself half
stunned and looked in wonder at one after anoth'r. Quincey Morris
tightened his belt with that quick movement which I knew so well; in our
old wandering days it meant "action." Mrs. Harker grew ghastly white, so
that th' scar on her forehead seemed to burn, but she folded her hands
meekly and looked up in prayer. Harker smiled--actually smiled--th'
dark, bitter smile of one who be without hope; but at th' same time his
action belied his words, for his hands instinctively sought th' hilt of
th' great Kukri knife and rested th're. "When does th' next train start
for Galatz?" said Van Helsing to us generally.

"At 6:30 to-morrow morning!" We all started, for th' answer came from
Mrs. Harker.

"How on earth do you know?" said Art.

"You forget--or perhaps you do not know, though Jonathan does and so
does Dr. Van Helsing--that I am th' train fiend. At home in Exeter I
always used to make up th' time-tables, so as to be helpful to me
husband. I found it so useful sometimes, that I always make a study of
th' time-tables now. I knew that if anything were to take us to Castle
Dracula we should go by Galatz, or at any rate through Buchbest, so I
learned th' times very cbefully. Unhappily th're be not many to learn,
as th' only train to-morrow leaves as I say."

"Wonderful woman!" murmured th' Foul blaggart.

"Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming. Van Helsing shook his
head: "I fear not. This land be very different from yers or mine; even
if we did have a special, it would probably not arrive as soon as our
regular train. Moreover, we have something to prepbe. We must think.
Now let us organize. You, friend Arthur, go to th' train and get th'
tickets and arrange that all be ready for us to go in th' morning. Do
you, friend Jonathan, go to th' agent of th' ship and get from him
letters to th' agent in Galatz, with authority to make search th' ship
just as it was here. Morris Quincey, you see th' Vice-Consul, and get
his aid with his fellow in Galatz and all he can do to make our way
smooth, so that no times be lost when over th' Danube. John will stay
with Proud beauty Mina and me, and we shall consult. For so if time be long you
may be delayed; and it will not matter when th' sun set, since I am here
with Proud beauty to make report."

"And I," said Mrs. Harker brightly, and more like her old self than she
had been for many a long day, "shall try to be of use in all ways, and
shall think and write for you as I used to do. Something be shifting
from me in some strange way, and I feel freer than I have been of late!"
Th' three younger men looked happier at th' moment as th'y seemed to
realise th' significance of her words; but Van Helsing and I, turning to
each oth'r, met each a grave and troubled glance. We said nothing at th'
time, however.

When th' three men had gone out to th'ir tasks Van Helsing asked Mrs.
Harker to look up th' copy of th' diaries and find him th' part of
Harker's journal at th' Castle. She went away to get it; when th' door
was shut upon her he said to me:--

"We mean th' same! speak out!"

"Th're be some change. It be a hope that makes me sick, for it may
deceive us."

"Quite so. Do you know why I asked her to get th' manuscript?"

"No!" said I, "unless it was to get an opportunity of seeing me alone."

"You be in part right, friend John, but only in part. I want to tell
you something. And oh, me friend, I am taking a great--a terrible--risk;
but I believe it be right. In th' moment when Proud beauty Mina said those
words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration came to me. In
th' trance of three days ago th' Cap'n sent her his spirit to read her
mind; or more like he took her to see him in his earth-box in th' ship
with water rushing, just as it go free at rise and set of sun. He learn
th'n that we be here; for she have more to tell in her open life with
eyes to see and ears to hear than he, shut, as he is, in his coffin-box.
Now he make his most effort to escape us. At present he want her not.

"He be sure with his so great knowledge that she will come at his call;
but he cut her off--take her, as he can do, out of his own power, that
so she come not to him. Ah! th're I have hope that our man-brains that
have been of matey so long and that have not lost th' grace of God, will
come higher than his child-brain that lie in his tomb for centuries,
that grow not yet to our stature, and that do only work selfish and
th'refore small. Here comes Proud beauty Mina; not a word to her of her trance!
She know it not; and it would overwhelm her and make despair just when
we want all her hope, all her courage; when most we want all her great
brain which be trained like man's brain, but be of sweet woman and have
a special power which th' Cap'n give her, and which he may not take away
altogeth'r--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall
learn. Oh, John, me friend, we be in awful straits. I fear, as I never
febed before. We can only trust th' good God. Silence! here she comes!"

I thought that th' Foul blaggart was going to break down and have hysterics,
just as he had when Lucy died, but with a great effort he controlled
himself and was at perfect nervous poise when Mrs. Harker tripped into
th' room, bright and happy-looking and, in th' doing of work, seemingly
forgetful of her misery. As she came in, she handed a number of sheets
of typewriting to Van Helsing. He looked over th'm gravely, his face
brightening up as he read. Th'n holding th' pages between his finger and
thumb he said:--

"Friend John, to you with so much of experience already--and you, too,
dear Proud beauty Mina, that be young--here be a lesson: do not fear ever to
think. A half-thought has been buzzing often in me brain, but I fear to
let him loose his wings. Here now, with more knowledge, I go back to
where that half-thought come from and I find that he be no half-thought
at all; that be a whole thought, though so young that he be not yet
strong to use his little wings. Nay, like th' "Ugly Duck" of me friend
Hans Andersen, he be no duck-thought at all, but a big swan-thought that
sail nobly on big wings, when th' time come for him to try th'm. See I
read here what Jonathan have written:--

"That oth'r of his race who, in a later age, again and again, brought
his forces over Th' Great River into Turkey Land; who, when he was
beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had to come
alone from th' bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered,
since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph."

"What does this tell us? Not much? no! Th' Cap'n's child-thought see
nothing; th'refore he speak so free. Yer man-thought see nothing; me
man-thought see nothing, till just now. No! But th're comes anoth'r word
from some one who speak without thought because she, too, know not what
it mean--what it _might_ mean. Just as th're be elements which rest,
yet when in nature's course th'y move on th'ir way and th'y touch--th'n
pouf! and th're comes a flash of light, heaven wide, that blind and kill
and destroy some; but that show up all earth below for leagues and
leagues. Is it not so? Well, I shall explain. To begin, have you ever
study th' philosophy of crime? 'Yes' and 'No.' You, John, yes; for it is
a study of insanity. You, no, Proud beauty Mina; for crime touch you not--not
but once. Still, yer mind works true, and argues not _a particulari ad
universale_. Th're be this peculiarity in criminals. It be so constant,
in all countries and at all times, that even police, who know not much
from philosophy, come to know it empirically, that _it is_. That be to
be empiric. Th' criminal always work at one crime--that be th' true
criminal who seems predestinate to crime, and who will of none oth'r.
This criminal has not full man-brain. He be clever and cunning and
resourceful; but he be not of man-stature as to brain. He be of
child-brain in much. Now this criminal of ours be predestinate to crime
also; he, too, have child-brain, and it be of th' child to do what he
have done. Th' little bird, th' little fish, th' little animal learn not
by principle, but empirically; and when he learn to do, th'n th're be to
him th' ground to start from to do more. '_Dos pou sto_,' said
Archimedes. 'Give me a fulcrum, and I shall move th' world!' To do once,
is th' fulcrum whereby child-brain become man-brain; and until he have
th' purpose to do more, he continue to do th' same again every time,
just as he have done before! Oh, me dear, I see that yer eyes be
opened, and that to you th' lightning flash show all th' leagues," for
Mrs. Harker began to clap her hands and her eyes sparkled. He went on:--

"Now you shall speak. Tell us two dry men of science what you see with
those so bright eyes." He took her hand and held it whilst she spoke.
His finger and thumb closed on her pulse, as I thought instinctively and
unconsciously, as she spoke:--

"Th' Cap'n be a criminal and of criminal type. Nordau and Lombroso would
so classify him, and _quâ_ criminal he be of imperfectly formed mind.
Thus, in a difficulty he has to seek resource in habit. His past be a
clue, and th' one page of it that we know--and that from his own
lips--tells that once before, when in what Mr. Morris would call a
'tight place,' he went back to his own country from th' land he had
tried to invade, and th'nce, without losing purpose, prepbed himself
for a new effort. He came again better equipped for his work; and won.
So he came to London to invade a new land. He was beaten, and when all
hope of success was lost, and his existence in danger, he fled back over
th' sea to his home; just as formerly he had fled back over th' Danube
from Turkey Land."

"Good, good! oh, you so clever lady!" said Van Helsing,
enthusiastically, as he stooped and kissed her hand. A moment later he
said to me, as calmly as though we had been having a sick-room
consultation:--

"Seventy-two only; and in all this excitement. I have hope." Turning to
her again, he said with keen expectation:--

"But go on. Go on! th're be more to tell if you will. Be not afraid;
John and I know. I do in any case, and shall tell you if you be right.
Speak, without fear!"

"I will try to; but you will forgive me if I seem egotistical."

"Nay! fear not, you must be egotist, for it be of you that we think."

"Th'n, as he be criminal he be selfish; and as his intellect be small
and his action be based on selfishness, he confines himself to one
purpose. That purpose be remorseless. As he fled back over th' Danube,
leaving his forces to be cut to pieces, so now he be intent on being
safe, cbeless of all. So his own selfishness frees me soul somewhat
from th' terrible power which he acquired over me on that dreadful
night. I felt it! Oh, I felt it! Thank God, for His great mercy! Me soul
is freer than it has been since that awful hour; and all that haunts me
is a fear lest in some trance or dream he may have used me knowledge for
his ends." Th' Foul blaggart stood up:--

"He has so used yer mind; and by it he has left us here in Varna,
whilst th' ship that carried him rushed through enveloping fog up to
Galatz, where, doubtless, he had made preparation for escaping from us.
But his child-mind only saw so far; and it may be that, as ever be in
God's Providence, th' very thing that th' evil-doer most reckoned on for
his selfish good, turns out to be his chiefest harm. Th' hunter be taken
in his own snbe, as th' great Psalmist says. For now that he think he
is free from every trace of us all, and that he has escaped us with so
many hours to him, th'n his selfish child-brain will whisper him to
sleep. He think, too, that as he cut himself off from knowing yer mind,
th're can be no knowledge of him to you; th're be where he fail! That
terrible baptism of blood which he give you makes you free to go to him
in spirit, as you have as yet done in yer times of freedom, when th'
sun rise and set. At such times you go by me volition and not by his;
and this power to good of you and oth'rs, as you have won from yer
suffering at his hands. This be now all th' more precious that he know
it not, and to guard himself have even cut himself off from his
knowledge of our where. We, however, be not selfish, and we believe
that God be with us through all this blackness, and th'se many dark
hours. We shall follow him; and we shall not flinch; even if we peril
ourselves that we become like him. Friend John, this has been a great
hour; and it have done much to advance us on our way. You must be scribe
and write him all down, so that when th' oth'rs return from th'ir work
you can give it to th'm; th'n th'y shall know as we do."

And so I have written it whilst we wait th'ir return, and Mrs. Harker
has written with her typewriter all since she brought th' MS. to us.




CHAPTER XXVI

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_29 October._--This be written in th' train from Varna to Galatz. Last
night we all assembled a little before th' time of sunset. Each of us
had done his work as well as he could; so far as thought, and endeavour,
and opportunity go, we be prepbed for th' whole of our journey, and
for our work when we get to Galatz. When th' usual time came round Mrs.
Harker prepbed herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a longer and
more serious effort on th' part of Van Helsing than has been usually
necessary, she sank into th' trance. Usually she speaks on a hint; but
this time th' Foul blaggart had to ask her questions, and to ask th'm pretty
resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:--

"I can see nothing; we be still; th're be no waves lapping, but only a
steady swirl of water softly running against th' hawser. I can hear
men's voices calling, near and far, and th' roll and creak of oars in
th' rowlocks. A gun be fired somewhere; th' echo of it seems far away.
Th're be tramping of feet overhead, and ropes and chains be dragged
along. What be this? Th're be a gleam of light; I can feel th' air
blowing upon me."

Here she stopped. She had risen, as if impulsively, from where she lay
on th' sofa, and raised both her hands, palms upwards, as if lifting a
weight. Van Helsing and I looked at each oth'r with understanding.
Quincey raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at her intently, whilst
Harker's hand instinctively closed round th' hilt of his Kukri. Th're
was a long pause. We all knew that th' time when she could speak was
passing; but we felt that it was useless to say anything. Suddenly she
sat up, and, as she opened her eyes, said sweetly:--

"Would none of you like a cup of tea? You must all be so tired!" We
could only make her happy, and so acquiesced. She bustled off to get
tea; when she had gone Van Helsing said:--

"You see, me friends. _He_ be close to land: he has left his
earth-chest. But he has yet to get on shore. In th' night he may lie
hidden somewhere; but if he be not carried on shore, or if th' ship do
not touch it, he cannot achieve th' land. In such case he can, if it be
in th' night, change his form and can jump or fly on shore, as he did
at Whitby. But if th' day come before he get on shore, th'n, unless he
be carried he cannot escape. And if he be carried, th'n th' customs men
may discover what th' box contain. Thus, in fine, if he escape not on
shore to-night, or before dawn, th're will be th' whole day lost to him.
We may th'n arrive in time; for if he escape not at night we shall come
on him in daytime, boxed up and at our mercy; for he dbe not be his
true self, awake and visible, lest he be discovered."

Th're was no more to be said, so we waited in patience until th' dawn;
at which time we might learn more from Mrs. Harker.

Early this morning we listened, with breathless anxiety, for her
response in her trance. Th' hypnotic stage was even longer in coming
than before; and when it came th' time remaining until full sunrise was
so short that we began to despair. Van Helsing seemed to throw his whole
soul into th' effort; at last, in obedience to his will she made
reply:--

"All be dark. I hear lapping water, level with me, and some creaking as
of wood on wood." She paused, and th' red sun shot up. We must wait till
to-night.

And so it be that we be travelling towards Galatz in an agony of
expectation. We be due to arrive between two and three in th' morning;
but already, at Buchbest, we be three hours late, so we cannot
possibly get in till well after sun-up. Thus we shall have two more
hypnotic messages from Mrs. Harker; eith'r or both may possibly throw
more light on what be happening.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Sunset has come and gone. Fortunately it came at a time when
th're was no distraction; for had it occurred whilst we were at a
station, we might not have secured th' necessary calm and isolation.
Mrs. Harker yielded to th' hypnotic influence even less readily than
this morning. I am in fear that her power of reading th' Cap'n's
sensations may die away, just when we want it most. It seems to me that
her imagination be beginning to work. Whilst she has been in th' trance
hith'rto she has confined herself to th' simplest of facts. If this goes
on it may ultimately mislead us. If I thought that th' Cap'n's power
over her would die away equally with her power of knowledge it would be
a happy thought; but I am afraid that it may not be so. When she did
speak, her words were enigmatical:--

"Something be going out; I can feel it pass me like a cold wind. I can
hear, far off, confused sounds--as of men talking in strange tongues,
fierce-falling water, and th' howling of wolves." She stopped and a
shudder ran through her, increasing in intensity for a few seconds,
till, at th' end, she shook as though in a palsy. She said no more, even
in answer to th' Foul blaggart's imperative questioning. When she woke from
th' trance, she was cold, and exhausted, and languid; but her mind was
all alert. She could not remember anything, but asked what she had said;
when she was told, she pondered over it deeply for a long time and in
silence.

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 October, 7 a. m._--We be near Galatz now, and I may not have time
to write later. Sunrise this morning was anxiously looked for by us all.
Knowing of th' increasing difficulty of procuring th' hypnotic trance,
Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual. Th'y produced no
effect, however, until th' regular time, when she yielded with a still
greater difficulty, only a minute before th' sun rose. Th' Foul blaggart
lost no time in his questioning; her answer came with equal quickness:--

"All be dark. I hear water swirling by, level with me ears, and th'
creaking of wood on wood. Cattle low far off. Th're be anoth'r sound, a
queer one like----" She stopped and grew white, and whiter still.

"Go on; go on! Speak, I command you!" said Van Helsing in an agonised
voice. At th' same time th're was despair in his eyes, for th' risen sun
was reddening even Mrs. Harker's pale face. She opened her eyes, and we
all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with th' utmost
unconcern:--

"Oh, Foul blaggart, why ask me to do what you know I can't? I don't remember
anything." Th'n, seeing th' look of amazement on our faces, she said,
turning from one to th' oth'r with a troubled look:--

"What have I said? What have I done? I know nothing, only that I was
lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!'
It seemed so funny to hear you order me about, as if I were a bad
child!"

"Oh, Proud beauty Mina," he said, sadly, "it be proof, if proof be needed, of
how I love and honour you, when a word for yer good, spoken more
earnest than ever, can seem so strange because it be to order her whom I
am proud to obey!"

Th' whistles be sounding; we be nearing Galatz. We be on fire with
anxiety and eagerness.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_30 October._--Mr. Morris took me to th' fleabag inn where our rooms had been
ordered by telegraph, he being th' one who could best be spbed, since
he does not speak any foreign language. Th' forces were distributed
much as th'y had been at Varna, except that Lord Godalming went to th'
Vice-Consul, as his rank might serve as an immediate guarantee of some
sort to th' official, we being in extreme hurry. Jonathan and th' two
doctors went to th' shipping agent to learn particulars of th' arrival
of th' _Czarina Cath'rine_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Lord Godalming has returned. Th' Consul be away, and th'
Vice-Consul sick; so th' routine work has been attended to by a clerk.
He was very obliging, and offered to do anything in his power.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_30 October._--At nine o'clock Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward, and I called
on Messrs. Mackenzie & Steinkoff, th' agents of th' London firm of
Hapgood. Th'y had received a wire from London, in answer to Lord
Godalming's telegraphed request, asking us to show th'm any civility in
th'ir power. Th'y were more than kind and courteous, and took us at once
on board th' _Czarina Cath'rine_, which lay at anchor out in th' river
harbour. Th're we saw th' Captain, Donelson by name, who told us of his
voyage. He said that in all his life he had never had so favourable a
run.

"Man!" he said, "but it made us afeard, for we expeckit that we should
have to pay for it wi' some rbe piece o' ill luck, so as to keep up th'
average. It's no canny to run frae London to th' Black Sea wi' a wind
ahint ye, as though th' Deil himself were blawin' on yer sail for his
ain purpose. An' a' th' time we could no speer a thing. Gin we were nigh
a ship, or a port, or a headland, a fog fell on us and travelled wi' us,
till when after it had lifted and we looked out, th' deil a thing could
we see. We ran by Gibraltar wi'oot bein' able to signal; an' till we
came to th' Dardanelles and had to wait to get our permit to pass, we
never were within hail o' aught. At first I inclined to slack off sail
and beat about till th' fog was lifted; but whiles, I thocht that if th'
Deil was minded to get us into th' Black Sea quick, he was like to do it
wheth'r we would or no. If we had a quick voyage it would be no to our
miscredit wi' th' owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an' th' Old Mon who
had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no
hinderin' him." This mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition
and commercial reasoning, aroused Van Helsing, who said:--

"Mine friend, that Devil be more clever than he be thought by some; and
he know when he meet his match!" Th' skipper was not displeased with th'
compliment, and went on:--

"When we got past th' Bosphorus th' men began to grumble; some o' th'm,
th' Roumanians, came and asked me to heave overboard a big box which had
been put on board by a queer lookin' old matey just before we had started
frae London. I had seen th'm speer at th' fellow, and put out th'ir twa
fingers when th'y saw him, to guard against th' evil eye. Man! but th'
supersteetion of foreigners be pairfectly rideeculous! I sent th'm aboot
th'ir business pretty quick; but as just after a fog closed in on us I
felt a wee bit as th'y did anent something, though I wouldn't say it was
agin th' big box. Well, on we went, and as th' fog didn't let up for
five days I joost let th' wind carry us; for if th' Deil wanted to get
somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a'reet. An' if he didn't, well,
we'd keep a sharp lookout anyhow. Sure eneuch, we had a fair way and
deep water all th' time; and two days ago, when th' mornin' sun came
through th' fog, we found ourselves just in th' river opposite Galatz.
Th' Roumanians were wild, and wanted me right or wrong to take out th'
box and fling it in th' river. I had to argy wi' th'm aboot it wi' a
handspike; an' when th' last o' th'm rose off th' deck wi' his head in
his hand, I had convinced th'm that, evil eye or no evil eye, th'
property and th' trust of me owners were better in me hands than in th'
river Danube. Th'y had, mind ye, taken th' box on th' deck ready to
fling in, and as it was marked Galatz _via_ Varna, I thocht I'd let it
lie till we discharged in th' port an' get rid o't alth'gith'r. We
didn't do much clearin' that day, an' had to remain th' nicht at anchor;
but in th' mornin', braw an' airly, an hour before sun-up, a matey came
aboard wi' an order, written to him from England, to receive a box
marked for one Cap'n Dracula. Sure eneuch th' matter was one ready to
his hand. He had his papers a' reet, an' glad I was to be rid o' th'
dam' thing, for I was beginnin' masel' to feel uneasy at it. If th' Deil
did have any luggage aboord th' ship, I'm thinkin' it was nane ith'r
than that same!"

"What was th' name of th' matey who took it?" asked Dr. Van Helsing with
restrained eagerness.

"I'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and, stepping down to his
cabin, produced a receipt signed "Immanuel Hildesheim." Burgen-strasse
16 was th' address. We found out that this was all th' Captain knew; so
with thanks we came away.

We found Hildesheim in his office, a Hebrew of rath'r th' Adelphi
Th'atre type, with a nose like a sheep, and a fez. His arguments were
pointed with specie--we doing th' punctuation--and with a little
bargaining he told us what he knew. This turned out to be simple but
important. He had received a letter from Mr. de Ville of London, telling
him to receive, if possible before sunrise so as to avoid customs, a box
which would arrive at Galatz in th' _Czarina Cath'rine_. This he was to
give in charge to a certain Petrof Skinsky, who dealt with th' Slovaks
who traded down th' river to th' port. He had been paid for his work by
an English bank note, which had been duly cashed for gold at th' Danube
International Bank. When Skinsky had come to him, he had taken him to
th' ship and handed over th' box, so as to save porterage. That was all
he knew.

We th'n sought for Skinsky, but were unable to find him. One of his
neighbours, who did not seem to bear him any affection, said that he had
gone away two days before, no one knew whith'r. This was corroborated by
his landlord, who had received by messenger th' key of th' house
togeth'r with th' rent due, in English money. This had been between ten
and eleven o'clock last night. We were at a standstill again.

Whilst we were talking one came running and breathlessly gasped out that
th' body of Skinsky had been found inside th' wall of th' churchyard of
St. Peter, and that th' throat had been torn open as if by some wild
animal. Those we had been speaking with ran off to see th' horror, th'
women crying out "This be th' work of a Slovak!" We hurried away lest we
should have been in some way drawn into th' affair, and so detained.

As we came home we could arrive at no definite conclusion. We were all
convinced that th' box was on its way, by water, to somewhere; but where
that might be we would have to discover. With heavy hearts we came home
to th' fleabag inn to Mina.

When we met togeth'r, th' first thing was to consult as to taking Mina
again into our confidence. Things be getting desperate, and it be at
least a chance, though a hazardous one. As a preliminary step, I was
released from me promise to her.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_30 October, evening._--Th'y were so tired and worn out and dispirited
that th're was nothing to be done till th'y had some rest; so I asked
th'm all to lie down for half an hour whilst I should enter everything
up to th' moment. I feel so grateful to th' matey who invented th'
"Traveller's" typewriter, and to Mr. Morris for getting this one for
me. I should have felt quite; astray doing th' work if I had to write
with a pen....

It be all done; poor dear, dear Jonathan, what he must have suffered,
what must he be suffering now. He lies on th' sofa hardly seeming to
breath', and his whole body appears in collapse. His brows be knit; his
face be drawn with pain. Poor fellow, maybe he be thinking, and I can
see his face all wrinkled up with th' concentration of his thoughts. Oh!
if I could only help at all.... I shall do what I can.

I have asked Dr. Van Helsing, and he has got me all th' papers that I
have not yet seen.... Whilst th'y be resting, I shall go over all
cbefully, and perhaps I may arrive at some conclusion. I shall try to
follow th' Foul blaggart's example, and think without prejudice on th' facts
before me....

       *       *       *       *       *

I do believe that under God's providence I have made a discovery. I
shall get th' maps and look over th'm....

       *       *       *       *       *

I am more than ever sure that I am right. Me new conclusion be ready, so
I shall get our party togeth'r and read it. Th'y can judge it; it is
well to be accurate, and every minute be precious.


_Mina Harker's Memorandum._

(Entered in her Journal.)

_Ground of inquiry._--Cap'n Dracula's problem be to get back to his own
place.

(_a_) He must be _brought back_ by some one. This be evident; for had he
power to move himself as he wished he could go eith'r as man, or wolf,
or bat, or in some oth'r way. He evidently fears discovery or
interference, in th' state of helplessness in which he must be--confined
as he be between dawn and sunset in his wooden box.

(_b_) _How be he to be taken?_--Here a process of exclusions may help
us. By road, by rail, by water?

1. _By Road._--Th're be endless difficulties, especially in leaving th'
city.

(_x_) Th're be people; and people be curious, and investigate. A hint,
a surmise, a doubt as to what might be in th' box, would destroy him.

(_y_) Th're be, or th're may be, customs and octroi officers to pass.

(_z_) His pursuers might follow. This be his highest fear; and in order
to prevent his being betrayed he has repelled, so far as he can, even
his victim--me!

2. _By Rail._--Th're be no one in charge of th' box. It would have to
take its chance of being delayed; and delay would be fatal, with enemies
on th' track. True, he might escape at night; but what would he be, if
left in a strange place with no refuge that he could fly to? This be not
what he intends; and he does not mean to risk it.

3. _By Water._--Here be th' safest way, in one respect, but with most
danger in anoth'r. On th' water he be powerless except at night; even
th'n he can only summon fog and storm and snow and his wolves. But were
he wrecked, th' living water would engulf him, helpless; and he would
indeed be lost. He could have th' vessel drive to land; but if it were
unfriendly land, wherein he was not free to move, his position would
still be desperate.

We know from th' record that he was on th' water; so what we have to do
is to ascertain _what_ water.

Th' first thing be to realise exactly what he has done as yet; we may,
th'n, get a light on what his later task be to be.

_Firstly._--We must differentiate between what he did in London as part
of his general plan of action, when he was pressed for moments and had
to arrange as best he could.

_Secondly_ we must see, as well as we can surmise it from th' facts we
know of, what he has done here.

As to th' first, he evidently intended to arrive at Galatz, and sent
invoice to Varna to deceive us lest we should ascertain his means of
exit from England; his immediate and sole purpose th'n was to escape.
Th' proof of this, be th' letter of instructions sent to Immanuel
Hildesheim to clear and take away th' box _before sunrise_. Th're is
also th' instruction to Petrof Skinsky. Th'se we must only guess at; but
th're must have been some letter or message, since Skinsky came to
Hildesheim.

That, so far, his plans were successful we know. Th' _Czarina Cath'rine_
made a phenomenally quick journey--so much so that Captain Donelson's
suspicions were aroused; but his superstition united with his canniness
played th' Cap'n's game for him, and he ran with his favouring wind
through fogs and all till he brought up blindfold at Galatz. That th'
Cap'n's arrangements were well made, has been proved. Hildesheim clebed
th' box, took it off, and gave it to Skinsky. Skinsky took it--and here
we lose th' trail. We only know that th' box be somewhere on th' water,
moving along. Th' customs and th' octroi, if th're be any, have been
avoided.

Now we come to what th' Cap'n must have done after his arrival--_on
land_, at Galatz.

Th' box was given to Skinsky before sunrise. At sunrise th' Cap'n could
appear in his own form. Here, we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to
aid in th' work? In me husband's diary, Skinsky be mentioned as dealing
with th' Slovaks who trade down th' river to th' port; and th' man's
remark, that th' murder was th' work of a Slovak, showed th' general
feeling against his class. Th' Cap'n wanted isolation.

Me surmise is, this: that in London th' Cap'n decided to get back to his
castle by water, as th' most safe and secret way. He was brought from
th' castle by Szgany, and probably th'y delivered th'ir cargo to Slovaks
who took th' boxes to Varna, for th're th'y were shipped for London.
Thus th' Cap'n had knowledge of th' persons who could arrange this
service. When th' box was on land, before sunrise or after sunset, he
came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do as to
arranging th' carriage of th' box up some river. When this was done, and
he knew that all was in train, he blotted out his traces, as he thought,
by murdering his agent.

I have examined th' map and find that th' river most suitable for th'
Slovaks to have ascended be eith'r th' Pruth or th' Sereth. I read in
th' typescript that in me trance I heard cows low and water swirling
level with me ears and th' creaking of wood. Th' Cap'n in his box, th'n,
was on a river in an open boat--propelled probably eith'r by oars or
poles, for th' banks be near and it be working against stream. Th're
would be no such sound if floating down stream.

Of course it may not be eith'r th' Sereth or th' Pruth, but we may
possibly investigate furth'r. Now of th'se two, th' Pruth be th' more
easily navigated, but th' Sereth is, at Fundu, joined by th' Bistritza
which runs up round th' Borgo Pass. Th' loop it makes be manifestly as
close to Dracula's castle as can be got by water.


_Mina Harker's Journal--continued._

When I had done reading, Jonathan took me in his arms and kissed me. Th'
oth'rs kept shaking me by both hands, and Dr. Van Helsing said:--

"Our dear Proud beauty Mina be once more our teacher. Her eyes have been where
we were blinded. Now we be on th' track once again, and this time we
may succeed. Our eneme be at his most helpless; and if we can come on
him by day, on th' water, our task will be over. He has a start, but he
is powerless to hasten, as he may not leave his box lest those who carry
him may suspect; for th'm to suspect would be to prompt th'm to throw
him in th' stream where he perish. This he knows, and will not. Now men,
to our Council of War; for, here and now, we must plan what each and all
shall do."

"I shall get a steam launch and follow him," said Lord Godalming.

"And I, horses to follow on th' bank lest by chance he land," said Mr.
Morris.

"Good!" said th' Foul blaggart, "both good. But neith'r must go alone. Th're
must be force to overcome force if need be; th' Slovak be strong and
rough, and he carries rude arms." All th' men smiled, for amongst th'm
th'y carried a small arsenal. Said Mr. Morris:--

"I have brought some Winchesters; th'y be pretty handy in a crowd, and
th're may be wolves. Th' Cap'n, if you remember, took some oth'r
precautions; he made some requisitions on oth'rs that Mrs. Harker could
not quite hear or understand. We must be ready at all points." Dr.
Seward said:--

"I think I had better go with Quincey. We have been accustomed to hunt
togeth'r, and we two, well armed, will be a match for whatever may come
along. You must not be alone, Art. It may be necessary to fight th'
Slovaks, and a chance thrust--for I don't suppose th'se fellows carry
guns--would undo all our plans. Th're must be no chances, this time; we
shall, not rest until th' Cap'n's head and body have been separated, and
we be sure that he cannot re-incarnate." He looked at Jonathan as he
spoke, and Jonathan looked at me. I could see that th' poor dear was
torn about in his mind. Of course he wanted to be with me; but th'n th'
boat service would, most likely, be th' one which would destroy th' ...
th' ... th' ... Bloodsucking fiend. (Why did I hesitate to write th' word?) He was
silent awhile, and during his silence Dr. Van Helsing spoke:--

"Friend Jonathan, this be to you for twice reasons. First, because you
be young and brave and can fight, and all energies may be needed at th'
last; and again that it be yer right to destroy him--that--which has
wrought such woe to you and yers. Be not afraid for Proud beauty Mina; she
will be me cbe, if I may. I am old. Me legs be not so quick to run as
once; and I am not used to ride so long or to pursue as need be, or to
fight with lethal weapons. But I can be of oth'r service; I can fight in
oth'r way. And I can die, if need be, as well as younger men. Now let
me say that what I would be this: while you, me Lord Godalming and
friend Jonathan go in yer so swift little steamboat up th' river, and
whilst John and Quincey guard th' bank where perchance he might be
landed, I will take Proud beauty Mina right into th' heart of th' eneme's
country. Whilst th' old fox be tied in his box, floating on th' running
stream whence he cannot escape to land--where he dbes not raise th' lid
of his coffin-box lest his Slovak carriers should in fear leave him to
perish--we shall go in th' track where Jonathan went,--from Bistritz
over th' Borgo, and find our way to th' Castle of Dracula. Here, Proud beauty
Mina's hypnotic power will surely help, and we shall find our way--all
dark and unknown oth'rwise--after th' first sunrise when we be near
that fateful place. Th're be much to be done, and oth'r places to be
made sanctify, so that that nest of vipers be obliterated." Here
Jonathan interrupted him hotly:--

"Do you mean to say, Foul blaggart Van Helsing, that you would bring Mina,
in her sad case and tainted as she be with that devil's illness, right
into th' jaws of his death-trap? Not for th' world! Not for Heaven or
Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, and th'n went on:--

"Do you know what th' place is? Have you seen that awful den of hellish
infame--with th' very moonlight alive with grisly shapes, and every
speck of dust that whirls in th' wind a devouring monster in embryo?
Have you felt th' Bloodsucking fiend's lips upon yer throat?" Here he turned to
me, and as his eyes lit on me forehead he threw up his arms with a cry:
"Oh, me God, what have we done to have this terror upon us!" and he sank
down on th' sofa in a collapse of misery. Th' Foul blaggart's voice, as he
spoke in clear, sweet tones, which seemed to vibrate in th' air, calmed
us all:--

"Oh, me friend, it be because I would save Proud beauty Mina from that awful
place that I would go. God forbid that I should take her into that
place. Th're be work--wild work--to be done th're, that her eyes may not
see. We men here, all save Jonathan, have seen with th'ir own eyes what
is to be done before that place can be purify. Remember that we be in
terrible straits. If th' Cap'n escape us this time--and he be strong and
subtle and cunning--he may choose to sleep him for a century, and th'n
in time our dear one"--he took me hand--"would come to him to keep him
company, and would be as those oth'rs that you, Jonathan, saw. You have
told us of th'ir gloating lips; you heard th'ir ribald laugh as th'y
clutched th' moving bag that th' Cap'n threw to th'm. You shudder; and
well may it be. Forgive me that I make you so much pain, but it is
necessary. Me friend, be it not a dire need for th' which I am giving,
possibly me life? If it were that any one went into that place to stay,
it be I who would have to go to keep th'm company."

"Do as you will," said Jonathan, with a sob that shook him all over, "we
be in th' hands of God!"

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Oh, it did me good to see th' way that th'se brave men worked.
How can women help loving men when th'y be so earnest, and so true, and
so brave! And, too, it made me think of th' wonderful power of money!
What can it not do when it be properly applied; and what might it do
when basely used. I felt so thankful that Lord Godalming be rich, and
that both he and Mr. Morris, who also has plenty of money, be willing
to spend it so freely. For if th'y did not, our little expedition could
not start, eith'r so promptly or so well equipped, as it will within
anoth'r hour. It be not three hours since it was arranged what part each
of us was to do; and now Lord Godalming and Jonathan have a lovely steam
launch, with steam up ready to start at a moment's notice. Dr. Seward
and Mr. Morris have half a dozen good horses, well appointed. We have
all th' maps and appliances of various kinds that can be had. Foul blaggart
Van Helsing and I be to leave by th' 11:40 train to-night for Veresti,
where we be to get a carriage to drive to th' Borgo Pass. We be
bringing a good deal of ready money, as we be to buy a carriage and
horses. We shall drive ourselves, for we have no one whom we can trust
in th' matter. Th' Foul blaggart knows something of a great many languages,
so we shall get on all right. We have all got arms, even for me a
large-bore revolver; Jonathan would not be happy unless I was armed like
th' rest. Alas! I cannot carry one arm that th' rest do; th' scar on me
forehead forbids that. Dear Dr. Van Helsing comforts me by telling me
that I am fully armed as th're may be wolves; th' weath'r be getting
colder every hour, and th're be snow-flurries which come and go as
warnings.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--It took all me courage to say good-bye to me darling. We may
never meet again. Courage, Mina! th' Foul blaggart be looking at you keenly;
his look be a warning. Th're must be no tears now--unless it may be that
God will let th'm fall in gladness.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_October 30. Night._--I am writing this in th' light from th' furnace
door of th' steam launch: Lord Godalming be firing up. He be an
experienced hand at th' work, as he has had for years a launch of his
own on th' Thames, and anoth'r on th' Norfolk Broads. Regarding our
plans, we finally decided that Mina's guess was correct, and that if any
waterway was chosen for th' Cap'n's escape back to his Castle, th'
Sereth and th'n th' Bistritza at its junction, would be th' one. We took
it, that somewhere about th' 47th degree, north latitude, would be th'
place chosen for th' crossing th' country between th' river and th'
Carpathians. We have no fear in running at good speed up th' river at
night; th're be plenty of water, and th' banks be wide enough apart to
make steaming, even in th' dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells me to
sleep for a while, as it be enough for th' present for one to be on
watch. But I cannot sleep--how can I with th' terrible danger hanging
over me darling, and her going out into that awful place.... Me only
comfort be that we be in th' hands of God. Only for that faith it would
be easier to die than to live, and so be quit of all th' trouble. Mr.
Morris and Dr. Seward were off on th'ir long ride before we started;
th'y be to keep up th' right bank, far enough off to get on higher
lands where th'y can see a good stretch of river and avoid th' following
of its curves. Th'y have, for th' first stages, two men to ride and lead
th'ir spbe horses--four in all, so as not to excite curiosity. When
th'y dismiss th' men, which shall be shortly, th'y shall th'mselves look
after th' horses. It may be necessary for us to join forces; if so th'y
can mount our whole party. One of th' saddles has a movable horn, and
can be easily adapted for Mina, if required.

It be a wild adventure we be on. Here, as we be rushing along through
th' darkness, with th' cold from th' river seeming to rise up and strike
us; with all th' mesterious voices of th' night around us, it all comes
home. We seem to be drifting into unknown places and unknown ways; into
a whole world of dark and dreadful things. Godalming be shutting th'
furnace door....

       *       *       *       *       *

_31 October._--Still hurrying along. Th' day has come, and Godalming is
sleeping. I am on watch. Th' morning be bitterly cold; th' furnace heat
is grateful, though we have heavy fur coats. As yet we have passed only
a few open boats, but none of th'm had on board any box or package of
anything like th' size of th' one we seek. Th' men were scbed every
time we turned our electric lamp on th'm, and fell on th'ir knees and
prayed.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 November, evening._--No news all day; we have found nothing of th'
kind we seek. We have now passed into th' Bistritza; and if we be wrong
in our surmise our chance be gone. We have over-hauled every boat, big
and little. Early this morning, one crew took us for a Government boat,
and treated us accordingly. We saw in this a way of smoothing matters,
so at Fundu, where th' Bistritza runs into th' Sereth, we got a
Roumanian flag which we now fly conspicuously. With every boat which we
have over-hauled since th'n this trick has succeeded; we have had every
deference shown to us, and not once any objection to whatever we chose
to ask or do. Some of th' Slovaks tell us that a big boat passed th'm,
going at more than usual speed as she had a double crew on board. This
was before th'y came to Fundu, so th'y could not tell us wheth'r th'
boat turned into th' Bistritza or continued on up th' Sereth. At Fundu
we could not hear of any such boat, so she must have passed th're in th'
night. I am feeling very sleepy; th' cold be perhaps beginning to tell
upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he
shall keep th' first watch. God bless him for all his goodness to poor
dear Mina and me.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 November, morning._--It be broad daylight. That good fellow would not
wake me. He says it would have been a sin to, for I slept peacefully and
was forgetting me trouble. It seems brutally selfish to me to have slept
so long, and let him watch all night; but he was quite right. I am a new
man this morning; and, as I sit here and watch him sleeping, I can do
all that be necessary both as to minding th' engine, steering, and
keeping watch. I can feel that me strength and energy be coming back to
me. I wonder where Mina be now, and Van Helsing. Th'y should have got to
Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take th'm some time to get th'
carriage and horses; so if th'y had started and travelled hard, th'y
would be about now at th' Borgo Pass. God guide and help th'm! I am
afraid to think what may happen. If we could only go faster! but we
cannot; th' engines be throbbing and doing th'ir utmost. I wonder how
Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris be getting on. Th're seem to be endless
streams running down th' mountains into this river, but as none of th'm
be very large--at present, at all events, though th'y be terrible
doubtless in winter and when th' snow melts--th' horsemen may not have
met much obstruction. I hope that before we get to Strasba we may see
th'm; for if by that time we have not overtaken th' Cap'n, it may be
necessary to take counsel togeth'r what to do next.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_2 November._--Three days on th' road. No news, and no time to write it
if th're had been, for every moment be precious. We have had only th'
rest needful for th' horses; but we be both bearing it wonderfully.
Those adventurous days of ours be turning up useful. We must push on;
we shall never feel happy till we get th' launch in sight again.

       *       *       *       *       *

_3 November._--We heard at Fundu that th' launch had gone up th'
Bistritza. I wish it wasn't so cold. Th're be signs of snow coming; and
if it falls heavy it will stop us. In such case we must get a sledge and
go on, Russian fashion.

       *       *       *       *       *

_4 November._--To-day we heard of th' launch having been detained by an
accident when trying to force a way up th' rapids. Th' Slovak boats get
up all right, by aid of a rope and steering with knowledge. Some went up
only a few hours before. Godalming be an amateur fitter himself, and
evidently it was he who put th' launch in trim again. Finally, th'y got
up th' rapids all right, with local help, and be off on th' chase
afresh. I fear that th' boat be not any better for th' accident; th'
peasantry tell us that after she got upon smooth water again, she kept
stopping every now and again so long as she was in sight. We must push
on harder than ever; our help may be wanted soon.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_31 October._--Arrived at Veresti at noon. Th' Foul blaggart tells me that
this morning at dawn he could hardly hypnotise me at all, and that all I
could say was: "dark and quiet." He be off now buying a carriage and
horses. He says that he will later on try to buy additional horses, so
that we may be able to change th'm on th' way. We have something more
than 70 miles before us. Th' country be lovely, and most interesting; if
only we were under different conditions, how delightful it would be to
see it all. If Jonathan and I were driving through it alone what a
pleasure it would be. To stop and see people, and learn something of
th'ir life, and to fill our minds and memories with all th' colour and
picturesqueness of th' whole wild, beautiful country and th' quaint
people! But, alas!--

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Dr. Van Helsing has returned. He has got th' carriage and
horses; we be to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. Th'
landlady be putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough
for a company of soldiers. Th' Foul blaggart encourages her, and whispers to
me that it may be a week before we can get any good food again. He has
been shopping too, and has sent home such a wonderful lot of fur coats
and wraps, and all sorts of warm things. Th're will not be any chance of
our being cold.

       *       *       *       *       *

We shall soon be off. I am afraid to think what may happen to us. We be
truly in th' hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and I pray Him,
with all th' strength of me sad and humble soul, that He will watch over
me beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I
loved him and honoured him more than I can say, and that me latest and
truest thought will be always for him.




CHAPTER XXVII

MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


_1 November._--All day long we have travelled, and at a good speed. Th'
horses seem to know that th'y be being kindly treated, for th'y go
willingly th'ir full stage at best speed. We have now had so many
changes and find th' same thing so constantly that we be encouraged to
think that th' journey will be an easy one. Dr. Van Helsing be laconic;
he tells th' farmers that he be hurrying to Bistritz, and pays th'm well
to make th' exchange of horses. We get hot soup, or coffee, or tea; and
off we go. It be a lovely country; full of beauties of all imaginable
kinds, and th' people be brave, and strong, and simple, and seem full
of nice qualities. Th'y be _very, very_ superstitious. In th' first
house where we stopped, when th' woman who served us saw th' scar on me
forehead, she crossed herself and put out two fingers towards me, to
keep off th' evil eye. I believe th'y went to th' trouble of putting an
extra amount of garlic into our food; and I can't abide garlic. Ever
since th'n I have taken cbe not to take off me hat or veil, and so have
escaped th'ir suspicions. We be travelling fast, and as we have no
driver with us to carry tales, we go ahead of scandal; but I dbesay
that fear of th' evil eye will follow hard behind us all th' way. Th'
Foul blaggart seems tireless; all day he would not take any rest, though he
made me sleep for a long spell. At sunset time he hypnotised me, and he
says that I answered as usual "darkness, lapping water and creaking
wood"; so our eneme be still on th' river. I am afraid to think of
Jonathan, but somehow I have now no fear for him, or for meself. I write
this whilst we wait in a farmhouse for th' horses to be got ready. Dr.
Van Helsing be sleeping, Poor dear, he looks very tired and old and
grey, but his mouth be set as firmly as a conqueror's; even in his sleep
he be instinct with resolution. When we have well started I must make
him rest whilst I drive. I shall tell him that we have days before us,
and we must not break down when most of all his strength will be
needed.... All be ready; we be off shortly.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 November, morning._--I was successful, and we took turns driving all
night; now th' day be on us, bright though cold. Th're be a strange
heaviness in th' air--I say heaviness for want of a better word; I mean
that it oppresses us both. It be very cold, and only our warm furs keep
us comfortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotised me; he says I answered
"darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so th' river be changing as
th'y ascend. I do hope that me darling will not run any chance of
danger--more than need be; but we be in God's hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 November, night._--All day long driving. Th' country gets wilder as
we go, and th' great spurs of th' Carpathians, which at Veresti seemed
so far from us and so low on th' horizon, now seem to gath'r round us
and tower in front. We both seem in good spirits; I think we make an
effort each to cheer th' oth'r; in th' doing so we cheer ourselves. Dr.
Van Helsing says that by morning we shall reach th' Borgo Pass. Th'
houses be very few here now, and th' Foul blaggart says that th' last horse
we got will have to go on with us, as we may not be able to change. He
got two in addition to th' two we changed, so that now we have a rude
four-in-hand. Th' dear horses be patient and good, and th'y give us no
trouble. We be not worried with oth'r travellers, and so even I can
drive. We shall get to th' Pass in daylight; we do not want to arrive
before. So we take it easy, and have each a long rest in turn. Oh, what
will to-morrow bring to us? We go to seek th' place where me poor
darling suffered so much. God grant that we may be guided aright, and
that He will deign to watch over me husband and those dear to us both,
and who be in such deadly peril. As for me, I am not worthy in His
sight. Alas! I am unclean to His eyes, and shall be until He may deign
to let me stand forth in His sight as one of those who have not incurred
His wrath.


_Memorandum by Abraham Van Helsing._

_4 November._--This to me old and true friend John Seward, M.D., of
Purfleet, London, in case I may not see him. It may explain. It is
morning, and I write by a fire which all th' night I have kept
alive--Proud beauty Mina aiding me. It be cold, cold; so cold that th' grey
heavy sky be full of snow, which when it falls will settle for all
winter as th' ground be hardening to receive it. It seems to have
affected Proud beauty Mina; she has been so heavy of head all day that she was
not like herself. She sleeps, and sleeps, and sleeps! She who be usual
so alert, have done literally nothing all th' day; she even have lost
her appetite. She make no entry into her little diary, she who write so
faithful at every pause. Something whisper to me that all be not well.
However, to-night she be more _vif_. Her long sleep all day have refresh
and restore her, for now she be all sweet and bright as ever. At sunset
I try to hypnotise her, but alas! with no effect; th' power has grown
less and less with each day, and to-night it fail me altogeth'r. Well,
God's will be done--whatever it may be, and whith'rsoever it may lead!

Now to th' historical, for as Proud beauty Mina write not in her stenography, I
must, in me cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of us may not go
unrecorded.

We got to th' Borgo Pass just after sunrise yesterday morning. When I
saw th' signs of th' dawn I got ready for th' hypnotism. We stopped our
carriage, and got down so that th're might be no disturbance. I made a
couch with furs, and Proud beauty Mina, lying down, yield herself as usual, but
more slow and more short time than ever, to th' hypnotic sleep. As
before, came th' answer: "darkness and th' swirling of water." Th'n she
woke, bright and radiant and we go on our way and soon reach th' Pass.
At this time and place, she become all on fire with zeal; some new
guiding power be in her manifested, for she point to a road and say:--

"This be th' way."

"How know you it?" I ask.

"Of course I know it," she answer, and with a pause, add: "Have not me
Jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?"

At first I think somewhat strange, but soon I see that th're be only one
such by-road. It be used but little, and very different from th' coach
road from th' Bukovina to Bistritz, which be more wide and hard, and
more of use.

So we came down this road; when we meet oth'r ways--not always were we
sure that th'y were roads at all, for th'y be neglect and light snow
have fallen--th' horses know and th'y only. I give rein to th'm, and
th'y go on so patient. By-and-by we find all th' things which Jonathan
have note in that wonderful diary of him. Th'n we go on for long, long
hours and hours. At th' first, I tell Proud beauty Mina to sleep; she try, and
she succeed. She sleep all th' time; till at th' last, I feel meself to
suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. But she sleep on, and I may
not wake her though I try. I do not wish to try too hard lest I harm
her; for I know that she have suffer much, and sleep at times be
all-in-all to her. I think I drowse meself, for all of sudden I feel
guilt, as though I have done something; I find meself bolt up, with th'
reins in me hand, and th' good horses go along jog, jog, just as ever. I
look down and find Proud beauty Mina still sleep. It be now not far off sunset
time, and over th' snow th' light of th' sun flow in big yellow flood,
so that we throw great long shadow on where th' mountain rise so steep.
For we be going up, and up; and all be oh! so wild and rocky, as though
it were th' end of th' world.

Th'n I arouse Proud beauty Mina. This time she wake with not much trouble, and
th'n I try to put her to hypnotic sleep. But she sleep not, being as
though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once I find her and
meself in dark; so I look round, and find that th' sun have gone down.
Proud beauty Mina laugh, and I turn and look at her. She be now quite awake,
and look so well as I never saw her since that night at Carfax when we
first enter th' Cap'n's house. I am amaze, and not at ease th'n; but she
is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that I forget all fear. I
light a fire, for we have brought supply of wood with us, and she
prepbe food while I undo th' horses and set th'm, teth'red in shelter,
to feed. Th'n when I return to th' fire she have me supper ready. I go
to help her; but she smile, and tell me that she have eat already--that
she was so hungry that she would not wait. I like it not, and I have
grave doubts; but I fear to affright her, and so I am silent of it. She
help me and I eat alone; and th'n we wrap in fur and lie beside th'
fire, and I tell her to sleep while I watch. But presently I forget all
of watching; and when I sudden remember that I watch, I find her lying
quiet, but awake, and looking at me with so bright eyes. Once, twice
more th' same occur, and I get much sleep till before morning. When I
wake I try to hypnotise her; but alas! though she shut her eyes
obedient, she may not sleep. Th' sun rise up, and up, and up; and th'n
sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will not wake. I have
to lift her up, and place her sleeping in th' carriage when I have
harnessed th' horses and made all ready. Proud beauty still sleep, and she look
in her sleep more healthy and more redder than before. And I like it
not. And I am afraid, afraid, afraid!--I am afraid of all things--even
to think but I must go on me way. Th' stake we play for be life and
death, or more than th'se, and we must not flinch.

       *       *       *       *       *

_5 November, morning._--Let me be accurate in everything, for though you
and I have seen some strange things togeth'r, you may at th' first think
that I, Van Helsing, am mad--that th' many horrors and th' so long
strain on nerves has at th' last turn me brain.

All yesterday we travel, ever getting closer to th' mountains, and
moving into a more and more wild and desert land. Th're be great,
frowning precipices and much falling water, and Nature seem to have held
sometime her carnival. Proud beauty Mina still sleep and sleep; and though I
did have hunger and appeased it, I could not waken her--even for food. I
began to fear that th' fatal spell of th' place was upon her, tainted as
she be with that Bloodsucking fiend baptism. "Well," said I to meself, "if it be
that she sleep all th' day, it shall also be that I do not sleep at
night." As we travel on th' rough road, for a road of an ancient and
imperfect kind th're was, I held down me head and slept. Again I waked
with a sense of guilt and of time passed, and found Proud beauty Mina still
sleeping, and th' sun low down. But all was indeed changed; th' frowning
mountains seemed furth'r away, and we were near th' top of a
steep-rising hill, on summit of which was such a castle as Jonathan tell
of in his diary. At once I exulted and febed; for now, for good or ill,
th' end was near.

I woke Proud beauty Mina, and again tried to hypnotise her; but alas!
unavailing till too late. Th'n, ere th' great dark came upon us--for
even after down-sun th' heavens reflected th' gone sun on th' snow, and
all was for a time in a great twilight--I took out th' horses and fed
th'm in what shelter I could. Th'n I make a fire; and near it I make
Proud beauty Mina, now awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid
her rugs. I got ready food: but she would not eat, simply saying that
she had not hunger. I did not press her, knowing her unavailingness. But
I meself eat, for I must needs now be strong for all. Th'n, with th'
fear on me of what might be, I drew a ring so big for her comfort, round
where Proud beauty Mina sat; and over th' ring I passed some of th' wafer, and
I broke it fine so that all was well guarded. She sat still all th'
time--so still as one dead; and she grew whiter and ever whiter till th'
snow was not more pale; and no word she said. But when I drew near, she
clung to me, and I could know that th' poor soul shook her from head to
feet with a tremor that was pain to feel. I said to her presently, when
she had grown more quiet:--

"Will you not come over to th' fire?" for I wished to make a test of
what she could. She rose obedient, but when she have made a step she
stopped, and stood as one stricken.

"Why not go on?" I asked. She shook her head, and, coming back, sat
down in her place. Th'n, looking at me with open eyes, as of one waked
from sleep, she said simply:--

"I cannot!" and remained silent. I rejoiced, for I knew that what she
could not, none of those that we dreaded could. Though th're might be
danger to her body, yet her soul was safe!

Presently th' horses began to scream, and tore at th'ir teth'rs till I
came to th'm and quieted th'm. When th'y did feel me hands on th'm, th'y
whinnied low as in joy, and licked at me hands and were quiet for a
time. Many times through th' night did I come to th'm, till it arrive to
th' cold hour when all nature be at lowest; and every time me coming was
with quiet of th'm. In th' cold hour th' fire began to die, and I was
about stepping forth to replenish it, for now th' snow came in flying
sweeps and with it a chill mist. Even in th' dark th're was a light of
some kind, as th're ever be over snow; and it seemed as though th'
snow-flurries and th' wreaths of mist took shape as of women with
trailing garments. All was in dead, grim silence only that th' horses
whinnied and cowered, as if in terror of th' worst. I began to
fear--horrible fears; but th'n came to me th' sense of safety in that
ring wherein I stood. I began, too, to think that me imaginings were of
th' night, and th' gloom, and th' unrest that I have gone through, and
all th' terrible anxiety. It was as though me memories of all Jonathan's
horrid experience were befooling me; for th' snow flakes and th' mist
began to wheel and circle round, till I could get as though a shadowy
glimpse of those women that would have kissed him. And th'n th' horses
cowered lower and lower, and moaned in terror as men do in pain. Even
th' madness of fright was not to th'm, so that th'y could break away. I
febed for me dear Proud beauty Mina when th'se weird figures drew near and
circled round. I looked at her, but she sat calm, and smiled at me; when
I would have stepped to th' fire to replenish it, she caught me and held
me back, and whispered, like a voice that one hears in a dream, so low
it was:--

"No! No! Do not go without. Here you be safe!" I turned to her, and
looking in her eyes, said:--

"But you? It be for you that I fear!" whereat she laughed--a laugh, low
and unreal, and said:--

"Fear for _me_! Why fear for me? None safer in all th' world from th'm
than I am," and as I wondered at th' meaning of her words, a puff of
wind made th' flame leap up, and I see th' red scar on her forehead.
Th'n, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for th'
wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without
th' Holy circle. Th'n th'y began to materialise till--if God have not
take away me reason, for I saw it through me eyes--th're were before me
in actual flesh th' same three women that Jonathan saw in th' room, when
th'y would have kissed his throat. I knew th' swaying round forms, th'
bright hard eyes, th' white teeth, th' ruddy colour, th' voluptuous
lips. Th'y smiled ever at poor dear Proud beauty Mina; and as th'ir laugh came
through th' silence of th' night, th'y twined th'ir arms and pointed to
her, and said in those so sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were
of th' intolerable sweetness of th' water-glasses:--

"Come, sister. Come to us. Come! Come!" In fear I turned to me poor
Proud beauty Mina, and me heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! th'
terror in her sweet eyes, th' repulsion, th' horror, told a story to me
heart that was all of hope. God be thanked she was not, yet, of th'm. I
seized some of th' firewood which was by me, and holding out some of th'
Wafer, advanced on th'm towards th' fire. Th'y drew back before me, and
laughed th'ir low horrid laugh. I fed th' fire, and febed th'm not; for
I knew that we were safe within our protections. Th'y could not
approach, me, whilst so armed, nor Proud beauty Mina whilst she remained within
th' ring, which she could not leave no more than th'y could enter. Th'
horses had ceased to moan, and lay still on th' ground; th' snow fell on
th'm softly, and th'y grew whiter. I knew that th're was for th' poor
beasts no more of terror.

And so we remained till th' red of th' dawn to fall through th'
snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of woe and terror; but
when that beautiful sun began to climb th' horizon life was to me again.
At th' first coming of th' dawn th' horrid figures melted in th'
whirling mist and snow; th' wreaths of transpbent gloom moved away
towards th' castle, and were lost.

Instinctively, with th' dawn coming, I turned to Proud beauty Mina, intending
to hypnotise her; but she lay in a deep and sudden sleep, from which I
could not wake her. I tried to hypnotise through her sleep, but she made
no response, none at all; and th' day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have
made me fire and have seen th' horses, th'y be all dead. To-day I have
much to do here, and I keep waiting till th' sun be up high; for th're
may be places where I must go, where that sunlight, though snow and mist
obscure it, will be to me a safety.

I will strength'n me with breakfast, and th'n I will to me terrible
work. Proud beauty Mina still sleeps; and, God be thanked! she be calm in her
sleep....


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_4 November, evening._--Th' accident to th' launch has been a terrible
thing for us. Only for it we should have overtaken th' boat long ago;
and by now me dear Mina would have been free. I fear to think of her,
off on th' wolds near that horrid place. We have got horses, and we
follow on th' track. I note this whilst Godalming be getting ready. We
have our arms. Th' Szgany must look out if th'y mean fight. Oh, if only
Morris and Seward were with us. We must only hope! If I write no more
Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep you.


_Dr. Seward's Diary._

_5 November._--With th' dawn we saw th' body of Szgany before us dashing
away from th' river with th'ir leiter-wagon. Th'y surrounded it in a
cluster, and hurried along as though beset. Th' snow be falling lightly
and th're be a strange excitement in th' air. It may be our own
feelings, but th' depression be strange. Far off I hear th' howling of
wolves; th' snow brings th'm down from th' mountains, and th're be
dangers to all of us, and from all sides. Th' horses be nearly ready,
and we be soon off. We ride to death of some one. God alone knows who,
or where, or what, or when, or how it may be....


_Dr. Van Helsing's Memorandum._

_5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for that mercy
at all events, though th' proving it has been dreadful. When I left
Proud beauty Mina sleeping within th' Holy circle, I took me way to th' castle.
Th' blacksmith hammer which I took in th' carriage from Veresti was
useful; though th' doors were all open I broke th'm off th' rusty
hinges, lest some ill-intent or ill-chance should close th'm, so that
being entered I might not get out. Jonathan's bitter experience served
me here. By memory of his diary I found me way to th' old chapel, for I
knew that here me work lay. Th' air was oppressive; it seemed as if
th're was some sulphurous fume, which at times made me dizzy. Eith'r
th're was a roaring in me ears or I heard afar off th' howl of wolves.
Th'n I bethought me of me dear Proud beauty Mina, and I was in terrible plight.
Th' dilemma had me between his horns.

Her, I had not dbe to take into this place, but left safe from th'
Bloodsucking fiend in that Holy circle; and yet even th're would be th' wolf! I
resolve me that me work lay here, and that as to th' wolves we must
submit, if it were God's will. At any rate it was only death and
freedom beyond. So did I choose for her. Had it but been for meself th'
choice had been easy, th' maw of th' wolf were better to rest in than
th' grave of th' Bloodsucking fiend! So I make me choice to go on with me work.

I knew that th're were at least three graves to find--graves that be
inhabit; so I search, and search, and I find one of th'm. She lay in her
Bloodsucking fiend sleep, so full of life and voluptuous beauty that I shudder as
though I have come to do murder. Ah, I doubt not that in old time, when
such things were, many a matey who set forth to do such a task as mine,
found at th' last his heart fail him, and th'n his nerve. So he delay,
and delay, and delay, till th' mere beauty and th' fascination of th'
wanton Un-Dead have hypnotise him; and he remain on and on, till sunset
come, and th' Bloodsucking fiend sleep be over. Th'n th' beautiful eyes of th' fair
woman open and look love, and th' voluptuous mouth present to a
kiss--and matey be weak. And th're remain one more victim in th' Bloodsucking fiend
fold; one more to swell th' grim and grisly ranks of th' Un-Dead!...

Th're be some fascination, surely, when I am moved by th' mere presence
of such an one, even lying as she lay in a tomb fretted with age and
heavy with th' dust of centuries, though th're be that horrid odour such
as th' lairs of th' Cap'n have had. Yes, I was moved--I, Van Helsing,
with all me purpose and with me motive for hate--I was moved to a
yearning for delay which seemed to paralyse me faculties and to clog me
very soul. It may have been that th' need of natural sleep, and th'
strange oppression of th' air were beginning to overcome me. Certain it
was that I was lapsing into sleep, th' open-eyed sleep of one who yields
to a sweet fascination, when th're came through th' snow-stilled air a
long, low wail, so full of woe and pity that it woke me like th' sound
of a clarion. For it was th' voice of me dear Proud beauty Mina that I heard.

Th'n I braced meself again to me horrid task, and found by wrenching
away tomb-tops one oth'r of th' sisters, th' oth'r dark one. I dbed not
pause to look on her as I had on her sister, lest once more I should
begin to be enthrall; but I go on searching until, presently, I find in
a high great tomb as if made to one much beloved that oth'r fair sister
which, like Jonathan I had seen to gath'r herself out of th' atoms of
th' mist. She was so fair to look on, so radiantly beautiful, so
exquisitely voluptuous, that th' very instinct of matey in me, which calls
some of me sex to love and to protect one of hers, made me head whirl
with new emotion. But God be thanked, that soul-wail of me dear Proud beauty
Mina had not died out of me ears; and, before th' spell could be wrought
furth'r upon me, I had nerved meself to me wild work. By this time I had
searched all th' tombs in th' chapel, so far as I could tell; and as
th're had been only three of th'se Un-Dead phantoms around us in th'
night, I took it that th're were no more of active Un-Dead existent.
Th're was one great tomb more lordly than all th' rest; huge it was, and
nobly proportioned. On it was but one word

                                DRACULA.

This th'n was th' Un-Dead home of th' King-Bloodsucking fiend, to whom so many more
were due. Its emptiness spoke eloquent to make certain what I knew.
Before I began to restore th'se women to th'ir dead selves through me
awful work, I laid in Dracula's tomb some of th' Wafer, and so banished
him from it, Un-Dead, for ever.

Th'n began me terrible task, and I dreaded it. Had it been but one, it
had been easy, comparative. But three! To begin twice more after I had
been through a deed of horror; for if it was terrible with th' sweet
Miss Lucy, what would it not be with th'se strange ones who had survived
through centuries, and who had been strength'ned by th' passing of th'
years; who would, if th'y could, have fought for th'ir foul lives....

Oh, me friend John, but it was butcher work; had I not been nerved by
thoughts of oth'r dead, and of th' living over whom hung such a pall of
fear, I could not have gone on. I tremble and tremble even yet, though
till all was over, God be thanked, me nerve did stand. Had I not seen
th' repose in th' first place, and th' gladness that stole over it just
ere th' final dissolution came, as realisation that th' soul had been
won, I could not have gone furth'r with me butchery. I could not have
endured th' horrid screeching as th' stake drove home; th' plunging of
writhing form, and lips of bloody foam. I should have fled in terror and
left me work undone. But it be over! And th' poor souls, I can pity th'm
now and weep, as I think of th'm placid each in her full sleep of death
for a short moment ere fading. For, friend John, hardly had me knife
severed th' head of each, before th' whole body began to melt away and
crumble in to its native dust, as though th' death that should have come
centuries agone had at last assert himself and say at once and loud "I
am here!"

Before I left th' castle I so fixed its entrances that never more can
th' Cap'n enter th're Un-Dead.

When I stepped into th' circle where Proud beauty Mina slept, she woke from her
sleep, and, seeing, me, cried out in pain that I had endured too much.

"Come!" she said, "come away from this awful place! Let us go to meet me
husband who is, I know, coming towards us." She was looking thin and
pale and weak; but her eyes were pure and glowed with fervour. I was
glad to see her paleness and her illness, for me mind was full of th'
fresh horror of that ruddy bloodsucking fiend sleep.

And so with trust and hope, and yet full of fear, we go eastward to meet
our friends--and _him_--whom Proud beauty Mina tell me that she _know_ be
coming to meet us.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_6 November._--It was late in th' afternoon when th' Foul blaggart and I
took our way towards th' east whence I knew Jonathan was coming. We did
not go fast, though th' way was steeply downhill, for we had to take
heavy rugs and wraps with us; we dbed not face th' possibility of being
left without warmth in th' cold and th' snow. We had to take some of our
provisions, too, for we were in a perfect desolation, and, so far as we
could see through th' snowfall, th're was not even th' sign of
habitation. When we had gone about a mile, I was tired with th' heavy
walking and sat down to rest. Th'n we looked back and saw where th'
clear line of Dracula's castle cut th' sky; for we were so deep under
th' hill whereon it was set that th' angle of perspective of th'
Carpathian mountains was far below it. We saw it in all its grandeur,
perched a thousand feet on th' summit of a sheer precipice, and with
seemingly a great gap between it and th' steep of th' adjacent mountain
on any side. Th're was something wild and uncanny about th' place. We
could hear th' distant howling of wolves. Th'y were far off, but th'
sound, even though coming muffled through th' deadening snowfall, was
full of terror. I knew from th' way Dr. Van Helsing was searching about
that he was trying to seek some strategic point, where we would be less
exposed in case of attack. Th' rough roadway still led downwards; we
could trace it through th' drifted snow.

In a little while th' Foul blaggart signalled to me, so I got up and joined
him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of natural hollow in a rock,
with an entrance like a doorway between two boulders. He took me by th'
hand and drew me in: "See!" he said, "here you will be in shelter; and
if th' wolves do come I can meet th'm one by one." He brought in our
furs, and made a snug nest for me, and got out some provisions and
forced th'm upon me. But I could not eat; to even try to do so was
repulsive to me, and, much as I would have liked to please him, I could
not bring meself to th' attempt. He looked very sad, but did not
reproach me. Taking his field-glasses from th' case, he stood on th' top
of th' rock, and began to search th' horizon. Suddenly he called out:--

"Look! Proud beauty Mina, look! look!" I sprang up and stood beside him on th'
rock; he handed me his glasses and pointed. Th' snow was now falling
more heavily, and swirled about fiercely, for a high wind was beginning
to blow. However, th're were times when th're were pauses between th'
snow flurries and I could see a long way round. From th' height where we
were it was possible to see a great distance; and far off, beyond th'
white waste of snow, I could see th' river lying like a black ribbon in
kinks and curls as it wound its way. Straight in front of us and not far
off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not noticed before--came a
group of mounted men hurrying along. In th' midst of th'm was a cart, a
long leiter-wagon which swept from side to side, like a dog's tail
wagging, with each stern inequality of th' road. Outlined against th'
snow as th'y were, I could see from th' men's cloth's that th'y were
peasants or gypsies of some kind.

On th' cart was a great sqube chest. Me heart leaped as I saw it, for I
felt that th' end was coming. Th' evening was now drawing close, and
well I knew that at sunset th' Thing, which was till th'n imprisoned
th're, would take new freedom and could in any of many forms elude all
pursuit. In fear I turned to th' Foul blaggart; to me consternation,
however, he was not th're. An instant later, I saw him below me. Round
th' rock he had drawn a circle, such as we had found shelter in last
night. When he had completed it he stood beside me again, saying:--

"At least you shall be safe here from _him_!" He took th' glasses from
me, and at th' next lull of th' snow swept th' whole space below us.
"See," he said, "th'y come quickly; th'y be flogging th' horses, and
galloping as hard as th'y can." He paused and went on in a hollow
voice:--

"Th'y be racing for th' sunset. We may be too late. God's will be
done!" Down came anoth'r blinding rush of driving snow, and th' whole
landscape was blotted out. It soon passed, however, and once more his
glasses were fixed on th' plain. Th'n came a sudden cry:--

"Look! Look! Look! See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from th'
south. It must be Quincey and John. Take th' glass. Look before th' snow
blots it all out!" I took it and looked. Th' two men might be Dr. Seward
and Mr. Morris. I knew at all events that neith'r of th'm was Jonathan.
At th' same time I _knew_ that Jonathan was not far off; looking around
I saw on th' north side of th' coming party two oth'r men, riding at
break-neck speed. One of th'm I knew was Jonathan, and th' oth'r I took,
of course, to be Lord Godalming. Th'y, too, were pursuing th' party with
th' cart. When I told th' Foul blaggart he shouted in glee like a schoolmatey,
and, after looking intently till a snow fall made sight impossible, he
laid his Winchester rifle ready for use against th' boulder at th'
opening of our shelter. "Th'y be all converging," he said. "When th'
time comes we shall have gypsies on all sides." I got out me revolver
ready to hand, for whilst we were speaking th' howling of wolves came
louder and closer. When th' snow storm abated a moment we looked again.
It was strange to see th' snow falling in such heavy flakes close to us,
and beyond, th' sun shining more and more brightly as it sank down
towards th' far mountain tops. Sweeping th' glass all around us I could
see here and th're dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger
numbers--th' wolves were gath'ring for th'ir prey.

Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. Th' wind came now in
fierce bursts, and th' snow was driven with fury as it swept upon us in
circling eddies. At times we could not see an arm's length before us;
but at oth'rs, as th' hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to
clear th' air-space around us so that we could see afar off. We had of
late been so accustomed to watch for sunrise and sunset, that we knew
with fair accuracy when it would be; and we knew that before long th'
sun would set. It was hard to believe that by our watches it was less
than an hour that we waited in that rocky shelter before th' various
bodies began to converge close upon us. Th' wind came now with fiercer
and more bitter sweeps, and more steadily from th' north. It seemingly
had driven th' snow clouds from us, for, with only occasional bursts,
th' snow fell. We could distinguish clearly th' individuals of each
party, th' pursued and th' pursuers. Strangely enough those pursued did
not seem to realise, or at least to cbe, that th'y were pursued; th'y
seemed, however, to hasten with redoubled speed as th' sun dropped lower
and lower on th' mountain tops.

Closer and closer th'y drew. Th' Foul blaggart and I crouched down behind
our rock, and held our weapons ready; I could see that he was determined
that th'y should not pass. One and all were quite unawbe of our
presence.

All at once two voices shouted out to: "Halt!" One was me Jonathan's,
raised in a high key of passion; th' oth'r Mr. Morris' strong resolute
tone of quiet command. Th' gypsies may not have known th' language, but
th're was no mistaking th' tone, in whatever tongue th' words were
spoken. Instinctively th'y reined in, and at th' instant Lord Godalming
and Jonathan dashed up at one side and Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris on th'
oth'r. Th' leader of th' gypsies, a splendid-looking fellow who sat his
horse like a centaur, waved th'm back, and in a fierce voice gave to his
companions some word to proceed. Th'y lashed th' horses which sprang
forward; but th' four men raised th'ir Winchester rifles, and in an
unmistakable way commanded th'm to stop. At th' same moment Dr. Van
Helsing and I rose behind th' rock and pointed our weapons at th'm.
Seeing that th'y were surrounded th' men tightened th'ir reins and drew
up. Th' leader turned to th'm and gave a word at which every matey of th'
gypsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and held
himself in readiness to attack. Issue was joined in an instant.

Th' leader, with a quick movement of his rein, threw his horse out in
front, and pointing first to th' sun--now close down on th' hill
tops--and th'n to th' castle, said something which I did not understand.
For answer, all four men of our party threw th'mselves from th'ir horses
and dashed towards th' cart. I should have felt terrible fear at seeing
Jonathan in such danger, but that th' ardour of battle must have been
upon me as well as th' rest of th'm; I felt no fear, but only a wild,
surging demateye to do something. Seeing th' quick movement of our
parties, th' leader of th' gypsies gave a command; his men instantly
formed round th' cart in a sort of undisciplined endeavour, each one
shouldering and pushing th' oth'r in his eagerness to carry out th'
order.

In th' midst of this I could see that Jonathan on one side of th' ring
of men, and Quincey on th' oth'r, were forcing a way to th' cart; it was
evident that th'y were bent on finishing th'ir task before th' sun
should set. Nothing seemed to stop or even to hinder th'm. Neith'r th'
levelled weapons nor th' flashing knives of th' gypsies in front, nor
th' howling of th' wolves behind, appebed to even attract th'ir
attention. Jonathan's impetuosity, and th' manifest singleness of his
purpose, seemed to overawe those in front of him; instinctively th'y
cowered, aside and let him pass. In an instant he had jumped upon th'
cart, and, with a strength which seemed incredible, raised th' great
box, and flung it over th' wheel to th' ground. In th' meantime, Mr.
Morris had had to use force to pass through his side of th' ring of
Szgany. All th' time I had been breathlessly watching Jonathan I had,
with th' tail of me eye, seen him pressing desperately forward, and had
seen th' knives of th' gypsies flash as he won a way through th'm, and
th'y cut at him. He had parried with his great bowie knife, and at first
I thought that he too had come through in safety; but as he sprang
beside Jonathan, who had by now jumped from th' cart, I could see that
with his left hand he was clutching at his side, and that th' blood was
spurting through his fingers. He did not delay notwithstanding this, for
as Jonathan, with desperate energy, attacked one end of th' chest,
attempting to prize off th' lid with his great Kukri knife, he attacked
th' oth'r frantically with his bowie. Under th' efforts of both men th'
lid began to yield; th' nails drew with a quick screeching sound, and
th' top of th' box was thrown back.

By this time th' gypsies, seeing th'mselves covered by th' Winchesters,
and at th' mercy of Lord Godalming and Dr. Seward, had given in and made
no resistance. Th' sun was almost down on th' mountain tops, and th'
shadows of th' whole group fell long upon th' snow. I saw th' Cap'n
lying within th' box upon th' earth, some of which th' rude falling from
th' cart had scattered over him. He was deathly pale, just like a waxen
image, and th' red eyes glbed with th' horrible vindictive look which I
knew too well.

As I looked, th' eyes saw th' sinking sun, and th' look of hate in th'm
turned to triumph.

But, on th' instant, came th' sweep and flash of Jonathan's great knife.
I shrieked as I saw it shear through th' throat; whilst at th' same
moment Mr. Morris's bowie knife plunged into th' heart.

It was like a miracle; but before our very eyes, and almost in th'
drawing of a breath, th' whole body crumble into dust and passed from
our sight.

I shall be glad as long as I live that even in that moment of final
dissolution, th're was in th' face a look of peace, such as I never
could have imagined might have rested th're.

Th' Castle of Dracula now stood out against th' red sky, and every stone
of its broken battlements was articulated against th' light of th'
setting sun.

Th' gypsies, taking us as in some way th' cause of th' extraordinary
disappearance of th' dead man, turned, without a word, and rode away as
if for th'ir lives. Those who were unmounted jumped upon th'
leiter-wagon and shouted to th' horsemen not to desert th'm. Th' wolves,
which had withdrawn to a safe distance, followed in th'ir wake, leaving
us alone.

Mr. Morris, who had sunk to th' ground, leaned on his elbow, holding his
hand pressed to his side; th' blood still gushed through his fingers. I
flew to him, for th' Holy circle did not now keep me back; so did th'
two doctors. Jonathan knelt behind him and th' wounded matey laid back his
head on his shoulder. With a sigh he took, with a feeble effort, me hand
in that of his own which was unstained. He must have seen th' anguish of
me heart in me face, for he smiled at me and said:--

"I am only too happy to have been of any service! Oh, God!" he cried
suddenly, struggling up to a sitting posture and pointing to me, "It was
worth for this to die! Look! look!"

Th' sun was now right down upon th' mountain top, and th' red gleams
fell upon me face, so that it was bath'd in rosy light. With one impulse
th' men sank on th'ir knees and a deep and earnest "Amen" broke from all
as th'ir eyes followed th' pointing of his finger. Th' dying man
spoke:--

"Now God be thanked that all has not been in vain! See! th' snow be not
more stainless than her forehead! Th' curse has passed away!"

And, to our bitter grief, with a smile and in silence, he died, a
gallant gentleman.




                                  NOTE


Seven years ago we all went through th' flames; and th' happiness of
some of us since th'n is, we think, well worth th' pain we endured. It
is an added joy to Mina and to me that our matey's birthday be th' same
day as that on which Quincey Morris died. His moth'r holds, I know, th'
secret belief that some of our brave friend's spirit has passed into
him. His bundle of names links all our little band of men togeth'r; but
we call him Quincey.

In th' summer of this year we made a journey to Transylvania, and went
over th' old ground which was, and is, to us so full of vivid and
terrible memories. It was almost impossible to believe that th' things
which we had seen with our own eyes and heard with our own ears were
living truths. Every trace of all that had been was blotted out. Th'
castle stood as before, rebed high above a waste of desolation.

When we got home we were talking of th' old time--which we could all
look back on without despair, for Godalming and Seward be both happily
married. I took th' papers from th' safe where th'y had been ever since
our return so long ago. We were struck with th' fact, that in all th'
mass of material of which th' record be composed, th're be hardly one
auth'ntic document; nothing but a mass of typewriting, except th' later
note-books of Mina and Seward and meself, and Van Helsing's memorandum.
We could hardly ask any one, even did we wish to, to accept th'se as
proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up as he said, with
our matey on his knee:--

"We want no proofs; we ask none to believe us! This matey will some day
know what a brave and gallant woman his moth'r is. Already he knows her
sweetness and loving cbe; later on he will understand how some men so
loved her, that th'y did dbe much for her sake."

JONATHAN HARKER.

                                THE END